# rNdfQ6mRXAQ.en-orig（字幕清洗稿，29158 字）

What does it mean to be a good softwareer when AI can write the code?c] And why does deep technicaledge still matter so much?

Today,exploring these questions withC. Martin, also known as Uncleuthor of Clean Code and Cleanrchitecture [music]of the original authors of theManifesto. Today we talk about whyn code and [music] cleanitecture still matter when you'reng with agents. The static analysisobert uses to keep them on track[music] he checks the quality ofe agents write. How much of theyou still need to read and hows understanding your customers[music]the technical decisions you make.u're an engineer wanting toerstand where your technicaltise [music] matters most and howit to build better software withis episode [music] is for you.Enjoy.me to the podcast, Robert. It'st to have you here.o be here. So you have to knowhroughout all this season of thet the main topic has been howeers can get more private mindede been speaking with a lot ofle from product and engineeringground about this because companiesays are really asking these newponsibilities from engineers thata bit more product a bit morebut these are things that really't build a muscle for Right. As engineers so but you know thekind of clear and you Robert asthat had a big influence on howeers write code and build software.you see this trend going?

the the trend towards producteering I think is being stronglyby the AI revolution. Right. SoIs take over more of the codingthe developers are going to havee over more of the productneering role load. There's there'sr way around this, right?

So weopers while we will still remaincal are going to have to bemunicating product information intoents and reviewing it and ensuringt's still doing it properly. Ande will all havesponsibility to be much more inith our customers than with thesyntax of the code.When I explain this to some people,hey usually tell me, isn't thisgood engineer has been all all, right?Just caring about thect, getting the right context. Soouldn't this become important justw and not before as it shouldve been?

Yeah., you're right. I mean, an engineershould have the product in thetomer in mind. You know, our angineer has a a mindset thattands what the product is, who themers are, and what problem they'relly solving. But it's very easyially for software engineers to geted on the code and so focused onny little problems that they areting to resolve in the code thatan easily bypass the the moreleoriented stuff that a gooder really needs to keep in mindtime. With the advent of AI, thetaking over a lot of thatvel detail work and that relievesineer to be able to turn theira little bit more outward, abit more towards the people sidengs while they still direct thegents to implement the appropriates. So, it's a shift in emphasishink all of us are feeling atment. You know, I I'm alreadyg that a lot of people from thethe audience may be wondering,is is great. I I I'm I'm havingAI agents doing more more of thegritty stuff that I know they canwell, but my company is askingeven more of the more moreure more features, more moreopment work. So, I don't reallye time not to to invest ing how to do product or design oretting involved in that area. Anduld you what would you say tothem?

, I doubt that the company you'reg for would object to you learningabout serving their customers.go to your managers and say,managers, I really need to getter on product engineering becausey, the AIs are taking over anlot of the low-level coding anded to be able to direct themrly." I don't think the businessnd that at all. And in any case,'re an engineer, that should befocus anyway, especially since thee relieving you of the lowestl nitty-gritty work. Your focusbe on serving the customer theay you can. Making sure theiness is properly represented.ow the the customers are properlyby the products that the businesscreates.ou see any similarities with thisnd what agile tried to solve backthen?

e. One of the founding principles ofas customer in the room. Now, youe didn't we didn't really want aer in the room. Well, actually, wedid, but most of us thought,we're not going to get theer in the room, but we probablyt a customer representative in theomebody who is very well aware ofustomer's needs and can representeeds, and they were in the rooms while we coded. Now obviouslyworld has changed and most of ust have communal rooms anymore.us code from home now but thee is still the same. You knownt contact with the customer or ata good customer representative waspart of agile and should alwaysain part of agile.if if I have to think about myexperience with both kind ofto have people working a bit moreecause I've been big fan of thatng but now also with all thect engineering thing which is kindy my my my battle the last forst two years. [laughter] I thinke the the most difficult part isy getting people on board, right?

ven with agile, what I noticedusually ended up in thesenies that were saying, "Okay, ouragile." And so we we do allind of process with all thenies. But then the rest of thewas still not doing HR like itill planning long term like veryplanning sessions and having thisteam doing things very fast. Bute rest of the company is notadapted to that yet. So this ism seeing in some companies. But Iss change is difficult.nge is difficult. Many people willnge just will refuse. um and somewill and what that causes isnal tension inside the team, insidempany. There's a a difference inand that's unstable. It it can'tAnd so what happens instead ishere's some kind of a divorce,Either one faction or the otherion leaves. That can happennly. It can happen gradually overut there's a shift so that peopleith values that they agree upon.w, they all have the same valuen finally work together and thosee a different value set, they cantogether maybe somewhere else.imes this happens inside a company.times it happens between companies.le will leave one company and gopany that has a set of valuese more in line with them. We'vethat throughout the industry overst 30 years now, especially withe and engineering disciplines andoing to see it with AI too.okay, let's say that we all agreengineers now have to get morelemed, more focused on design.you think would happens to theneers ability to build technicalions as there's focus shift shiftstowards product?

Is there anyanger there?

think so. Now um my history is aunique. I I um I started workingompany in the in the mid70sdid very technical work testingone lines. you know, we we wererking with microprocessorshad a a big distributedssing system. We were using modemsunicate and all of our code wasen in assembly language. So, thisally deep technical stuff. We werelots of interesting mathematics tosure the electronic characteristicslephone lines and measure theirs and trying to find faults onSo really really deep technicalf in assembly language inmicrocomputers.CEO of the company said, "Okay,ody working on this project has toin the truck with a repair manleast once."here I am like I'm a youngyear-old something, you know,rammer, barely know anything. Andsudden, I find myself in ahone repair man's truck in theddle of Indiana's up on a pole and he's talkingbout his problems and and Ivelop a sensethese people were that we wereg. I now I don't think mostnies do that. I think that'sunate. Uh but this guy, this thisid, "Okay, everybody has to goday with a customer just so thatwho it is that we are servingat their problems really are." Andack from that trip, just one daytruck with a completely differentective on everything that I washich I was able to apply in theechnical work that I was doing.did that make you feel?

More connected. Mhm.ew who these people were. I'mng there writing code that impactsy do when they're up at the tople trying to fix a telephoneof a sudden, I see that guy upnd I'm sitting in the truck andching him. I've got a much betterwho I'm serving and what I needo to serve them.absolutely. And yeah, I I I feltlike every time I joined a callith a users or run some customerviews myself. It's it's really goodr people telling you about theirgles and like why they're happy,ey're not happy. Like it createskind of human connection thatrwise you don't really have.company that I was working was ay interesting company. It was angineering company and one of thesophies was the authority of theeer, right?

The authority of theineer super superseded everything,f the engineer said it had to beGod it had to be done. But onher side of that, all theneers answered the field serviceo we had 800 watts lines. We hadmbers that would ring inside ofb. And literally a giant belling in the lab. And that meantomebody, one of the engineers hadck up the line and talk toa customer or a field serviceand work them through their issue.were always collaborating witho help them resolve the issuese having. So it was a very ateresting way for me to grow upn a deep engineering environmentyet maintain customer contact.t?

Okay. So let's say we understandt's important for engineers to ifan't get [snorts] exposed to tomers or users just develop thisempathy.So what do you think is thegest argument like the strong thestrongestnt on the product side for deepical skill?So how does thatusers and the business in a moreyou in like in practical termsone has to have deep technical skillyou really don't want is a wallen the product skill and thecal skill. But this has kind ofped over the years, right?

As asindustry has maturede I'm not sure it's matured, butindustry has grown, as the numberprogrammers has increasedically and as the size of projectsincreased, we've seen this wallp between the people who focus ont and the people who focus deepically, right?

And that's a badIt shouldn't be there. There canle who are more attuned to oned there can be people who aretuned to the other side but theshouldn't exist. There should becoupling between them. So it ismportant to have people with deepical skills but those people oughtle to cross the wall to thet side of things so that theystand what the needs of theer and the business are. The laste want to have are these deepical silos of engineers and allare about is the the currente and getting the current thing tond they know nothing about thess and they know nothing about theer. That's a disaster and it's aer we've been living with for 20ars I think.you know as an as an engineer I'vethat happening every time someoneed me so likeow would you approach thiscal problem and how long would itd what what's the what are thees you need to invest in this ande thing is they usually told meithout much context on the problems going to solve right so it'ske it feels very natural for aner should feel very natural to sayhave to create this technicalsolutionthe exact problem we we areo solve here on on the on themer side?

What what's the behaviort to implement?What's the outcometo enable?

Because I I for meery difficult to see these twos separated like the the theical trade-offs that you need too enable the product and thats very important in in productpment. So yeah, that's going to beinteresting thing to see how itin the next years. I had annce in the middle of my tenure atompany that I was talking about.the things that we learned reallyn was that it was important tostomer that from the moment theyd a command at a terminal, thee time had to be less than ad. Right?

That was really importante these guys are highly paid ande very busy and they don't wantAnd so that was drilled into usn when we were at the company.years later, I was working on arent part of the company, differentt, but I came back to thatal product and I noticed that thatd grown to 3 seconds. And Ited investigating that. Well, whatd here?

That used to be a rule.dy knew it. You know, all of us,ineers, we all knew that this wasical thing. And now it's suddenlyo 3 seconds. And and of course,ad happened was is that moreers came in and they weren't awarerule and they weren't aware ofustomer's needs. And they startedsome things that grew that timing. And I came down like a hammeryou know. So I, you know, atI, I was probably 30 at the, you know, I came down like theld guy.You guys, don't you knowwere you away?

I mean, themers are are suffering out theree you put this two second delay.hey weren't very happy. The youngrs thought I was kind of an olddy at the age of 30. But anyway,s another one of those stories,the the the the knowledge of theomer, the knowledge of theer's needs can get lost in theneering mastrom, in the engineeringthat happens. And as engineersinwards, they lose they losection with the needs of theer that were well known at onet but not well communicatedafterwards., makes sense. Makes sense. And nowo going to feel hold because I'murning 34. So I think uh[laughter]g to be the guy that's going toll people off.ight. Okay. So [clears throat]e a lot of good books and videosvideos about how to write goodo you know the famous books cleande clean architecture.you see this these practices taketo the AI era?

So we know that've been very useful forunicating maybe intent to otherlopers structure codebases very wellw all the stuff there but nowis writing most of the code andes we don't even read it how arethoseces important now and what do dove any effect on how like thes of of a product that we'rebuilding?are they important?Yes, they'rertant. Why are they important?

're important because the samegs that confuse human programmerse AI programmers. So, so if youand you feed an AI a big ballyou know, some horrible bit ofthat's all intertangled and veryult to understand, the AI is goinga real tough time with that.they'll probably solve it, buta tough time just like a humanve a tough time with it. If oner hand, you you make sure thatkeep the code nice and clean,ly named functions, nice smalltions, you know, nicely wellzed, the AIS have a much easierh it. So the the goal of theer now the human engineer is toay to drive the AIS to adoptsame tools and principles andrds. And I do that by creatingministic tools. I I write programse AIs can run that measure theof the code and then I put thea loop until the code matchesind of standard. Right?

So there'sbunch of tools like that that It keep the quality of the codethe AI's produced very high.'ve been trying a similar approachand I tried to create somes to measure the quality of thede base. But what I've beening in is like okay I have thisnow what what what is it tellingt the codebase?So have you foundsome very interesting metrics thatengineers can use to track they of the code and that areally telling you something usefulnd direct?

Yeah, there's there'sThe one that I like best is hasfortunate name. It's called crap.. Derives from a tool that wasd in I think 2007 called crap forwhat this tool does is itres two things for every function.easures cyclomatic complexity whichthe number of pathways through ation. It also measures teste. So you give the tool your coder test suite and it runs youruite and it measures coverage infunction and then it measureslomatic complexity within everyon and then it mixes those twors goes to cyclomatic complexity ifoverage is 100%. And goes throughf if code coverage is not 100%.a a a really strong exponentialse and that number is called crap.f you measure the crap in athen the AI is forced to do aof things. In order to reduceI I I tell my AIS to keep crapsix, right?

In order to reducefirst of all has to make surehere are enough tests that coverunctions. And then secondly, it'stake the functions apart toe the cyclatic complexity. And thatse has a very positive impact onucture of the code. Turns out thevery good at doing this. If youem a really big function and tellokay, split this apart to reduceatic complexity, they're very goodt. They'll pull it apart. They'llthem nice names. They'll they'llll separate them by the leastng, you know, so they'll pull themright at the coupling boundaries.very very good at that. And sose of a tool like that has aoundly positive impact. Another goodc is is simply duplication. Theregorithms that you can apply thatearch through a module and lookplicated code strings and you cann the duplication. Use a littleogic so that you can find, you, duplications that are notctly duplicate, but they're kind ofte. And then you can have the AIt that. And again, they're veryat reducing that kind oflication and inventing theactions that allow you to combinenctions by adding an argument org a little helper function oring like that. So just those twomselves have a profound impact onstructure of the code.What about more on on theitectural level?

Hey, Peppa here.ause. I promise it's a short one.two of the podcast will be allt helping engineers become product. Want to know when new episodesSubscribe to the YouTube channeln better rate the podcast onify, Apple Podcasts or wherevere listening. [music] It helps moreers find the show. You can alsod everything at productengineers.com.[music]ow back to the episode.is I have a tool that where Ie engineer specify which moduleslowed to depend on which otheres and what direction they areto depend in. And then I I puto a little text file and then Iool that looks at the looks atode, compares it against thoseencies and passes or fails. And itit actually produces a diagnosticthat the that the AIs can thensay, "Oh, well, I've got aation of the dependency structure.ng to have to take things apart."turns out, once again, the AIStremely good at figuring out wayske illicit dependencies and correcto for example, it'll take out amorphic interface to take ancy and turn it around or it willmodule in two so that it cana cycle of dependencies. Very verythis kind of stuff as long asive them a hard metric.can't do with an AI and this isrustrating. What you can't do withtell it please please keep thisency structure in mind. If you putto a prompt, it will forget thatt. They're not very good atbering their prompts and they willny rule you set for them becausewill focus. They will focus very. And as they focus deeply, everyyou've ever told them disappearswill do whatever it takes to toone little thing that you tolddo. So you have to give themministic tools and then in pursuitse deterministic tools they can doery good jobeah also all the linting tools thate very useful I've seen but alsoests right> yese are a very good feedback loopss that's where we kind of bridgeroduct because you have you cantests as automated specificationsthe agent should not break thosetests.Absolutely not.e my agents write unit tests andhave my agents write acceptancein a language called Girkin.e my agents write QA tests whichtten from the point of view ofl testing. Right?

They go throughnterface. They don't touch theof the code. They go through theinterface. I have my agents writethree streams of tests and Ithe last two. I don't review theests. I figure that's the agentsss. But the Girkin tests and thes, I review or at least spothem. I might not review them linebut I at least spot check themsure they're sane. And then Ihe agents run all those tests,t?

And again through deterministic. The unit tests are obviouslyrministic. The Girkin tests, thehave to write a tool that parsesrkin and emits tests that cane. The QA tests, the agents havee a script that conforms to thet and then manipulates the systemrough that script.n I run mutation testing. So oncet all those tests in place, thenmutation testing. Mutation testingre you tell again it's arministic tool. The tool fiddleswith the source code and expectse tests will fail if the toola less than sign to a greateror an equal to a not equal oring like that. And then if theoes not fail, that's called aving mutant that the agent mustte a test for so that the testfail.s has the effect of locking thedeeply into the code. Right?

Sotle change in the code will failright?And any little change inill fail, right?

So the two arely strongly linked together. Thate three streams of tests makes itmely difficult for the AIs tocheat.ing to be very difficult for themak an old feature because there'sstreams of tests that check thatfeature and they're deeplyoven into the into the behavior ofhe system.ight. So, I can I already imagineTDD purists saying, "Oh my god,t the agents write the tests."you know, because there was allo that that always that part ofa design activity, right?So,> yeah.would you say to them?

l, I I tell my agentsllow the principles of TDD.w, they don't.not found a reliable way to getto really follow the humanipline. The human discipline oft-driven development is extremelygrained. Right?

you write like ait of a test and a little codetle test and a little code in ahat's maybe 5 seconds long. Thewon't do that. What the agentsthough is they will write testsnd then they will make them pass.always you can get them to writests first. And in writing thefirst that puts a design pressuregent to then write the code toe testable.If you write the test first, thene is going to be testable. Ands a strong advantage. That meansave to break all kinds ofings just to keep the codetestable.a good a good principle. Now, Ireview those tests. I make surehey write those tests first andd they make them pass. I don'tthose tests and I also don'tthe production code. I try not tot the code very much, right?

it seems to me that if we'reo take advantage of the speed oftools, if we're going to increaseoductivity, then we the humans areto have to disengage from deepdge of the code. That doesn't meandon't remain technical. You know,look at the code as it streamse screen and I still sometimes In a module and just to make surene. I'll do some spot checks fromo time and I interrogate theI talk to the agents and I askat the structure of this is andehaves and why it's this way andand so on so that I can createal model of the system that'sreated and then I can use myto be as skeptical as possiblehat mental model. And then I canchallenging questions and I canhallenging tests and I can makeat the system is evolving in theI want it to from a technicalof view not just a behavioralint of view.. Yeah. Yeah. That's something Ifind quite challenging like notat the code because on one sidelove that so I could focus moreproduct things but for me it'sbut on the other side I havethis impostor syndrome. I don't[laughter] So oh my god whatmaybe a lot of us engineers havekind of attached our sense ofto the code we write.s like oh my god who's going tocode now is going to think II'm I'm still in the in a bitmbo there. Have have you changedlike any idea any opinion aboutgold architecture TDD over overe last yearsewhat. So for example, it doesn'tme that the agents don't do theTDD thing, right?

The agents willite a bunch of tests and thenhem pass. And that doesn't botherI don't restrict the agents tomallalness of functions that Iestrict a human to. So in numericI would restrict a human to aue of four, but I let the agentsrap value of six. And it mightm have a crap value of eightse the agents have a better-term memory than a human does.s can keep several dozen prettynd they can manipulate them pretty. So in that sense, I think theree threshold differences,principal differences, but thresholdnces. I think we can be a bitlaxed with the agents in terms ofion size and testing discipline andd then we counter that on ther side with these deterministicthat they simply cannot violate.I guess then it becomes also uhquestion is when we if we wantew this code and we have thislaxed thresholds we need to be ass biased about about our pastmaybe if I see like a functionght arguments I would say oh myt you did there but now [snorts]y maybe the agent is better ift does the thing I I don't sees there [laughter] and I have atter day [snorts]t's sort of amusingents, I'd still make them changeit.Yeah. [laughter]Yeah. Right.ht, you know, I usually don't likean three. If I saw them usingfive, I might forgive it, butot going to forgive eight.All right.know, I I do spot checks on thebut very light, very light spotks. Usually, it's almost likeng my eyes, right?

Like I'll putde on the screen and instead ofthe code, I'll just kind of blurand look at the shape of it., okay, that looks like anable shape, and I don't reallyat they did inside there as longests are all passing. And I looknames of the functions. I payl attention to the names of theons, the names of the modules, andes of the classes and things likeecause I think that's important tothem.h. Isn't that a technique thaters use for landing pages?

They tothe text of headers.. [laughter] Right. Look at itough paper, you know.h. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Okay. So,practice is still important bothmans and now also for agents.o you think uh pro engineersd pro engineers should step asidenow it's time for a deeplist to to come into play?So,do super experts in a technologya technical vertical are importantnowadays?

u're going to want that whengot a deep technical problem toSo, for example, if you wereg an AI, if you were writing theep down in the in the trainingof the AI, well, you better haveathematical background to do that,Uh if you are writing the codedoes finite element analysis overplane wing, you better have thematical background to deal with thew the equations of state across aane wing. If you are going to beng the code that examines thet of the CERN accelerator, right?

at the traces through theerator. you better know what you'ren there. So, you know, there arewhen that deep technical knowledgeical. You just have to have it.st of business software, that ise case. Mostly, you know, we'rerying to cajul these machines intoconvenient behavior for a set ofomers and deep technical knowledgereally required for that. But inses it is if you're writing angine, you're going to have topretty deep technical knowledge onysics inside that game game enginew you're going to cheat thats so that you can get thermance you want. Yeah, I'm alsoking about like infrastructure oflatform engineers.seems like another group ofrs that need to be very good atly even though if we think aboutn they have a product anders us. So yeah, so it's it'suseful to have those kind ofuct thinking and design thinkingskills,o so let's say that thanks to AIilding all the tools that youested, the static tools andrministic tools, we create thefactory. Right?

Now this is thisconcept of the software factory,right?> Mhm.hink we can also get people fromther side to join buildingare?I mean like product managersigners do they have will they bedo that or what what are likerst principles they have to learn?e the skills they have to learn?e I think for us engineers it'sslightly easier to get on thatlike learning about product andthan the other the other waythere's a lot of hard skills torned. So do you see anythingpening in that sense?

k the the advent of AI makes itfor less technical people to getved with the building of softwares and that's not necessarily a badOur industry has been a constantn that direction. Right?

So backvery early days, programmers usedogram by literally punching holestape. That was in the 1940s and50s. And then, you know, Gracer comes along and says, "Sometimeswant to run a program that wecompiler that will translate aly higher level code down into thetape code." And the programmers ate were in up in arms. You'remake it so easy for people tocode that we won't have jobsanymore.is has happened at every stagethis. You know, when eventuallyand cobalt came out, all thembly language programmers were like,u just made it so simple." Whene out, this was fascinating. In0s when OO first came out, thereis backlash. Oh my god, you'reit so simple for everyone thatcan write code. This has been aant a constant issue throughout ourstry and it's always nonsensical.'s okay if some people can canyou know, VBA. They're not goingwriting deep technical systems,ey can do some spreadsheets. It'ssome people can write a fewand get the system to behave inetter way. But there is nocing the software engineer who hasnsight into what's going on insideystem and can develop the mentalof the system and be skepticalhow it behaves and pose thelenging tests and the challengingto make sure that the system isng properly. You know, so we areof a job just because somes can come in and maybe write aw nice prompts.> Mhm.u're hearing something, it's aenerator outside.worries. [sighs and gasps], I completely agree. It's like Iee product managers and designersa lot of fun with these toolsthey can bring ideas to life wayasier. And> yeah,e that as a communication tool,So instead of just talking andme in words what you want, youu create this nice tool and thehave and you can tell me likeshow me what what you have inbert, I think we are at the ends episode. It's been great havinge. Where can people follow you ifave any questions or just followgeneral where they can find you?

end a little time on X from time. used to be called Twitter, nowlled X. And my handle there isb Martin. And you can go to myite, which is just iscleancoder.com.can go to my video website,ich is cleancoders.com.[laughter]right. [snorts] Any spoilers for anyinteresting books coming out?bmitted the manuscript for agenticcipline title that I'veoking forward to read it.nk you again, Robert.
