# zcLPGC-tvgk.en-orig（字幕清洗稿，42589 字）

I've got a treat for you today. I've gote who I've been wanting to speaka while. Someone who has beeninto um I mean software for ass I've been a developer, muchthan I've been a developer. Andwho's now making his mark on thepace. We have uh Uncle Bob Martind in his bathrobe ready to throwown. [laughter]le Bob, hello. Welcome.llo and thank you. [laughter]d to be here.eat. It's great to have you. It'so have you. Um, for folks whot know the bathrobe thingifically, we should probably caveatWhat's What's going on there?

Andthe bathrobe become a importantt of your character?happened I think two years ago. Iy front porch in my bathrobe. It0 in the morning and and Id thinking about how awful SQL wasse of all [laughter] the SQLions and what you know makes noo have a textual language as yourase access um for security reasons.as in my bathroom at the timest pulled out my phone and Id and that became the morningthrobe rant. [laughter]ly it was popular so I did it aw more times.this the mood that you've comeay in?

Is this is this the uncle[laughter]It's early in the morning. It had my coffee and just don'tother me.0 in the morning thinking aboutl, man. [laughter] 6 in therning. Come on.one with this now. It's actually 10the morning. [laughter]throom off. I have me. I'm on myDiet Coke, so I'm fine.good. Okay. Well, now the polos out. Um what's what's the Unclestory like for there are probablyolks most of my folks areers but some of my folks are notpers as well in this audience. Howintroduce Uncle Bob the phenomenonis Uncle Bob to especiallynon-developers.omenon. I don't know about that. Umprogrammer. I I've been amer for a very long time. Uh overcentury at this point. uh startedfirst program was in 1964I was 12. [laughter]The program was was uh a little modeler that my mother had bought me12th birthday and programmed itting little white tubes on pegs.s essentially a three-bit finitemachine, but it fascinated theof me at the age of 12., you're 12 years old. How do weuh 50 years later, Uncle Bobng his thing now?

a little more than 50. Um, let'sl, I I you know, I just startedng as much as I could aboutmming. My father bought me a bookForran, a book about Cobalt, bookL1. I read them all. Had noes to execute anything on, so Iprograms on paper and executedy head. got a job uh um writingbit of code at the age of 16.that was a temporary thing. Thenal job at the age of 18 andbeen a programmer ever since.u've been in the trenches for aime and you wrote rather anortant book I think.I one of them I think wasant. I've written a few more butone of them seemed to take off.was a nice one.and um uh the cleanliness of coderemember correctly orh clean code. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.'s the second edition. This is thissecond edition. But you known it's it's maybe the most umainly when I have conversationsgood books. It's it's uh forare engineering. It's the one thatten gets quoted back at me. Likes incredibly popular, incrediblyential. So, and that's why I'msted to talk to you today becausehad this big influence in likeAI era and you've been working in-AI era for almost as long ass existed virtually now.ve things changed for you, Unclethat AI is out there and is am, so this took me a little bysurprisearoundber of of last year, Christmasnd I'm just fiddling around and Iready been playing with, you know,and a little bit of Grock and ait of this and a little bit ofAnd I hadn't been real impressed.then I went through a periodI thought, well, maybe theses are a little more interestinghought. And I I got an agent.ent I got I think was um Grockrock. It was an early Grock onest asked it to write me somet did a kind of a poor job butthe code and I was in thef a project at the time. So Ill maybe this thing can help mehis project and I started havingith me on the project and I wasg up after it all the time justw it was always making a mess.lways leaving little dog dude. And I thought, you know, it'sinteresting because it's fast, butfrustrating because it makes meslow.> Yep.then I started thinking, well, waitminute,it's fast, it can do things that. So in the uh very early 2000swere a couple of innovations thatught me. I thought oo these areideas but they were completelytical. One of them was called umUm it was uh it's an acronym.say?

But it's it was a way tocode coverage. So you would yourun code coverage, test coverageour code and you'd also measurecyclatic complexity of everyn and you would mix those two inlicated formula and out would comeand the score was a measure ofppy your function was. And uh waythe early 2000s, I thought thisidea. And I ran it over a bigt I was working on. And yeah,was a bunch of crappy functions,n it took me forever to goh every one of those functions andfix them and rewrite the testsand it was all working. So Ithink I really could afford to doSo although it was interesting, Iset it aside. And another one ofum innovations was called mutationg. And this this one really caughttention, too, because in mutation, you you have a little a littleam that runs through your sourceand flips negative signs tove signs and less than signs tor signs and equal signs to notsigns and other things as well.each of those flips, it runsntire test suite and expects thesuite to fail because obviouslyy've changed something significant.it doesn't fail, well, that's aing mutant and it must be killed.ran this again over that samet right around the year 2000. Ando run it overnight because theite ran for four minutes and Iunning it maybe several hundredh, but it came up with a bunchiving mutants which I was able tout once again, it was impractical.ot put that as part of a al build scenario. And so I'mg there last December or maybe itnuary by this time and I'mking,"Well, wait a minute. Thesee fast and they don't care howing the work iswill do what I tell them to do.don't you run crap overhing you've just done and it wouldp and then it would it wouldp the code." And I was watchinghis. I think, well, that's prettyAnd why don't you run mutationg, too?

and it would run theon testing. Maybe it took it 30s instead of an overnight run andwould plug all the holes andsure there were tests coveringything. I thought, you know,t be a way to clean up the dogese things leave a lot of deusff behind, but maybe this is ao clean up all the dog. So I Iued on this path of adding moreand continuing to work with thesend I got them to a place wherere doing a pretty good job. Soays my nowadays my principle is,w, I will set the agents working.ave them run these tools and I'mwork very hard to get it into aon where I don't have to look atcode at all.rust what they do. And now I dohings to verify that the code isecent. You know, I will look atap scores and make sure thatlow. And I will I will do spoton the code from time to time.ve a whole bunch of other testsrun. But overall, that's my goal.e things are fast, and they are,can constrain them to do a goodn I am not going to impose myslownessem. And my bonus is reviewing theinspecting the code at some kindl of detail. They are fast witham slow with code. So I'm goinghem have the code and I'm goingwith the stuff around that toe it's all okay. So far so good.our goal is topulling yourself away from theaway from human review totruct this scaffolding around thethat you don't have to interactmuch yourself and so that theis constrained as much as possibletight a straight jacket asle so that it can't make ae. I think there's so there's anion there that I want to touch onst which is thatd dog do right doesn't sound goodBritish accent dog do you knowwhy is why is dog do bad whyde bad like why why do we carethat because these things are sothey can move so quickly why dowhy are we bothering with all ofarness can't we just push throughthe bugs just disappear. One ofings I noticed really early on,ecemberish time frame, was that II'd be working with the the uhhis little Grock agent and I'ddo something and it would leaveis mess around and instead ofg the mess, I would have it dot thing and it would leave evenss around and then I would havee next thing. And I noticed itg down and I noticed it havinguh difficulty. It would it wouldo a mode where it would changething but inadvertently breakand then it would have to fixbut inadvertently break another.d going around in circles and It okay these agents they may bey be fast and they be maybevely smart but they are as subjectns are to messy code. Now maybes subject. Maybe there's aerence in threshold, but theold is still there. The code canssy enough that the agents cannotth it any any longer and thenjust start to spin and make aen worse and and be unable. I'vely had them just give up. Onene time said, "I just can't dealth this anymore."I'm paraphrasing it. didn't usewords, but that was obviously whats going on.So, your response to that then is,I clean up the crap?

" And Iwhen most people encounter that,start loading the agent withructions, right?They start saying,I'm going to pour in informationthe agent that's doing thementation, right?

I'm going to pileclaw.md or agents.mmd and everysee something bad I'm going ton instruction instead of whate doing where it's a deterministicanism. So you're using automatedwhereas a lot of other people arein my terminology steering righte trying to steer it. So whyyou are you doing any steering orw does that work in your mindset?

itially I started with that. Iyou know, I my early prompts were's how you do test-drivenopment. Here's how you do cleanHere's what your code should lookYou should follow all these rules.ou know, you come up withally a document that's five or 10long describing all the goodabout code. I I suppose I couldthe whole dog on book into it.Mhm.hat I noticed was that the agents,e models, whatever you want tohem, um they treat those rulesuh Pirates of the Caribbeane. They're more like guidelines,know, might follow.just Can I just credit you?

That'sy the metaphor that came into mywell. So, I'm glad we're alignedhere. [laughter]. Well, so they they definitely willen and there's technical reasonsis. I did a not not a lot ofch but some research into why thebehave this way and it turns outthere's this phenomenon known asthe middle. So as the contextbuilds up inside the model theat the very beginning and theat the very end have moreence than the stuff in the middler technical reasons. But oncethe the agent will ignore thein the middle. And anything youthe very beginning is going toved into the middle if it's long,?

So maybe the first threeces you put at the beginning willas priority, but the 50th and thesentence in there, they're gone.re just in the middle somewhere.poor agent is trying to dealthis massive context that's everng, ever growing. and it's tryingthe important bits out and then the middle is just gone. Sorministic tools don't disappear thatway.key that I think with agents,is really hard to do, the keygents is to trim that initialdown to its absolute minimum socan get as much of it assible into its priority.> Yeah.ht. and then do deterministic toolster the fact.ly. I refer to this as like thene and the dumb zone of the uht window. It's not my term. That'sdy's term. I stole it and it'sery good. Which is especially atrly part of the context window,he first 150k tokens, it's prettyBut then as you go along, thenattention relationships in thesformer get really strained. It'sly diluted. It's like everyone'sng. Each token is shouting in ad room and the room's getting moreed. Right?

you can't hear thefor the noise. That that's thatrings true for me. So you've gotou sort of rejected steering andt of started going back to someechniques in automated checks. Nownds like then because those checkso into the context window in theway that steering instructions do,kind of just layer those on,nd layer them up and up and up.you're using a language withtypes and like tests and like howat picture look to you?Is thereo much when it comes to automatedchecks?

's one of the things that I'mng very hard to figure out.ly there has to be a case where's too much, right?You eventuallyl slow the agents down to thewhere they're slower than humans.that point you've lost the game.it?Um, but as long as you canthe margin of productivity higherhuman, you're still you're stillthe game. Uh, and and from whatso far, I you know, I can getrgin, you know, like a factor ofthree or four, right?

They'lll still go pretty fast. Now, I'mwing them down a lot. When whenen you use these deterministicwhat you are really doing isputting them into a loop. Lots ofe like to talk about loopsays. You're putting them into and you're saying, "Okay, you mustt change the code until this toolat it's okay." And now the agentng around and around and around.ve got to do this. I've got toI've got to I've got to addsts over here. I've got to cutyclatic complexity. I've got tothese functions apart. Got to dowork. And it takes it a whilel that until it gets it intormance. So you're you're you're yousacrificing productivity for higherqualitysome point that's got to givet I haven't found the end pointthat yet.I'm in the midst of trying to getple agents talking to each otherding off to each other so thatdoes one thing and the next oneit and the next one tests it andone hardens it and so on. Andre's communication overhead liken that. and yet it's still fasterarge token than a human.s talk about that. Let's talk about- aent systems because that's Ithat super fascinating. I haved a bit of a and I think thisbe something something where wedifferis I've always had a bit of aon of like people who say uh youve I've got rid of all myrce. I now have a hundred agents.ne of them has a different role.l talk to each other. they've gotown email accounts, all that allbbish, you know. Um, and so forat's always worked, but okay, Imake an exception when it comesmplementation and then review,And I think the benefit there isaving two very specialized agents.having okay, you do theentation and it's kind of like areen refactor approach, which isement all it has to do is justte the bad test and then make itIt doesn't have to make itiful. And then the reviewer comesdoesn't have to do theration because it's already got thefrom the implementer. It knowsly what it's reviewing. And thenpile in quite a lot morering instructions in there becausesk is much less constrained. Soally interested in your take onn like what the implementer does,he reviewer does, and what theser hardener agents. I've notmented with that. Give me more onSo there's two advantages tog multiple agents like this. Thethat you can run them inel. So you could have, you know,coders running at the same time.little laptop can support a lothan three. Um the other advantagewhen you focus the agents downingle task, you're keeping thext window under control. The lostmiddle problem becomes much lessblem. So you can pile a fewt a lot more, but a few moreat the top and they'll tend tothem better. You can also set upem where the agents um are born,ask, and die so that the nextmes in with a clean context.lears throat] those are thentages. The disadvantages are thatrtup times are high, right?

So anakes, you know, 10 15 seconds tort up. uh and then it's got toout its whole context all over. So there's that that particulartime as well. I like to focuss much as I can. So I will runfier. The job of the specifier ise a a human written documentn it into a uh a girkina QA uh procedure. Girkin isw given when then stuff. It's avel acceptance test. Uh and a QAdure is a essentially a systemYou know you run the systemthe UI with a with a QAre. And I have them write it from's point of view. You are aYou are operating this system atYou must prove that the systemworks.will produce those two documents.n documents QA documents. And theneed into a coder. The coder's jobite unit tests and the code thatents the described uh story and uht the girkin working. So it hasat and then that gets fed over.hat's working, the coder will workfor a little while that gets fedcleaner and the cleaner's job iscrap analysis and just generaleview. clean it clean up whateverthe implement made because theent will have made a horrible messpoint. And then I have it gohere to a hardener. The hardenerguy who runs the mutation testinghe's absolutely merciless,laughter] right?

ing to mutate it and it's goinge 100% coverage and every equald every less it's going to dork which takes a good long time.pops out the end and then ito a QA agent and the QA agentthe the written QA document, turnsto an executable script thatlates the system and comes up withrministic result. And and if youet through all of that,e got a pretty pretty working. I' I've had a lot of successit uh if I if I give it ahat takes a single agent fivetes to complete with questionable. Uh this will take it about ant'll take about an hour to goh all that which is still at because you know a person wouldut a half a day. So maybe I'veu know a factor of four factorve improvement in productivity andigh quality much more quality thanan would ever put into it. Andot only that, but you're you'reng productivity or or you'reing productivity early to gain itright?

This is an investment inwn codebase. Yeah. What I foundinteresting about that is this isthing I've been thinking aboutly is it's not only the contextow that you're manipulating. You'rehere's this idea of a trajectoryntext window, right?

Of a sessionyou get the agent to do oned you steer it in a certain way,everything that follows in thatsession, that same context window,continue following that trajectory.get it to say, "Okay, maybe wetest the UI here," then everytime it will test the UI again,r how many changes you get it tond the only way to clear thectory is to clear the context, right?

So if you're an implementnd you're just trying to get itg, then your trajectory is kind ofquite as harsh as the one who'sto make sure you have 100%age. And I found that reallyesting. Is that something you doeslick with your mental model aswell?, it certainly does. There's a aty well-known effect with theseand it happens with people who't programmers, right?So, you'reto a model about um oh, I don'tat what's the best coffee to havedo you how do you brew ity?

And you're having this nicee conversation with the agent aboutwith the model about this. Andomebody walks by and they happentalking about the latest soapthat they saw saw on televisionat gets into the context window.dn't put it there. This guyby put it in there. But thenhat point on all the coffeences have to do with the soapright?

The the the model doesn'tIt can't differentiate. So yourof trajectory is pretty good,As long as you can keep thection of the model unconfused.ws the direction it's going in.thing in the context window isconsistent.'s not going to have these crazyucinations that that people ofteneal withven just mis even just misalignmentlike halluc I think hallucinationays a danger right like whetheryou know hallucination context youwhatever like it's an sort of anted danger and your approach ofkind of gauntlet of differents slamming horrendous stuff is sortgreat way of taking out thatyou've talked a lot about theentation phase and we can get backt later too. What I'm alsoted in is what planning do you dofront and especiallye you thinking about the internalture of your code bases?

Becausea good test suite, right?I mean,terested in what you think here.a good test suite is good, right?g mutation testing, all that stuffd. But if you've got badlyned APIs, if you've got badlyd modules, how does that interactll of this automated checks andlike how much are you thinkingbout that?o the last month or so, what Iing there was doing that party. So I would I would have theuild me up a nice thing and thend interrogate the agents. And thisnual but but still using thets, right?

I'd interrogate thes. What's the structure here?Howoes this module interrelate withodule?What are the modules afterhow do they talk to each other?

ask those questions and then Iget scared to death because theers were horribly frightening. Andwould design a module structureould tell the agent, okay, here'she modules should really betioned and here's how you shouldicate with them. And I would givean implementation plan that theyuld then implement.t's a that's a tough one. So Iad my agents build me ancture viewer so I can pop up onreen a nice little UML diagramtially nice little UML diagram thatme the modular structure of them and where the dependencies runclick on a module and I cande it to the subm modules and Ick on the subm modules and it'lly pop the code up on on ther me. So I can I can drill downas I want and view the systemtecture at any level. That wasseful to me and I I've made goodthat. I've also put together aer deterministic tool where I cane which module should depend onwhich one should not depend on, how the dependency should flow.oes into a nice tight littleification file that the agentsot violate. There's another littlethat runs at the end and if theye it, they've got to fix ithow. Usually by inverting adency or inserting an interface oring a module in half or somethingand it will it will um keep myrulesfrom being violated.ing now to see if I can automateI'm having not a lot of luck[laughter]o far.sically in exactly the same boatwhich is you just get so mucherage by having well-designedes, right?

Could you explain whaterage is?Why is why is having astructure for these modulesimportant?

it's the same argument that we hade dirty code versus clean code.ing that is well partitioned withd disciplined interfaces between itething a human can grasp becausepartmentalize in our minds well soodels so do the agents maybe atghtly different threshold I don'tout that yet but they work farf they can focus on a module andt module has a trajectory rightour term so that the the modelnot get confused [clears throat]topics inside that module. Okay,ng the word model and module. Iant [laughter]clear.get it. We get it.that that's important. And it's thergument. It's the coffee and soapa argument. If you load up awith every bit of stuff under thethe sun, the the poor agent iso wonder, "What the heck am Ihere?

How do I do anything in?

" if you compartmentalize nicelypretty well just like a human.you're getting and you're probablyg better value out of your testas well because that's what Ithink is like okay I supposes here's another question for youelated to this I think of and Iay I'm a huge fan of um hugeur work but I'm also a huge fanohn Aster's work. Yeahum I mean who isn't a great guyu probably got his book aroundere. Um and his concept of deepes is something I find reallyting which is you have an you canad modules which is kind ofw modules right that have a wideface and not much hidden insided you can also have deep modulesave a small interface and then aum lots of hidden informationthem and it occurs to me thats really good with models becausecan read the interface withoutng to understand the implementation.at sort of chime with you?

Andnot how you're approaching thingss well.> Yeah,absolutely. Doesmodels pay attention to interfaceThey they pay attention to there. It can allow them to not reade beneath them, which is both aer and and an advantage.> Yong as the code is consistent,okay. Um they also pay attentiontests. They read tests totand what the system does. Um sol anything you can do that helpsucture of the code will help theunderstand that code. By the waybook there is a long debateme and John Ora in the appendixas a lot of fun. He and I hadWell I don't know how much funut I had a lot of fun.ched I watched the entire thing. Iguys interviewed um on a reallyuh uh YouTube discussion where youout it and I I I I just lovedthat's kind of the reason Iyou to come on actually because Ienjoyed that so much. Um okay,a few different ways I could goow. UmIs there in your book anythingou would change or update now?

use specifically I'm thinking aboutadvice like um create smallions let's say and keep functionsm is there is there anything thate sort of because we've beena lot about how things have noted right how gauntlets like thislways been good we've just nevere labor available to actually pushh them right these ideas have beena long time we're just sort ofng them in a different way but isnything that we just need to andI suppose a wide question. Isnything that we need to throw outjust like done or is thereng that's I don't like asking thison because it puts a lot ofe on you, but do you have anwer for that one?

m thresholds for one thing. Uh itme that the the agents can dealdifferent levels of complexity than. They have a a much better-term memory. I mean, a huget-term memory and a perfectlyate short-term memory. So one ofs that I do is I widen the umwed size of a function and I doadjusting the crap score. So forI would keep crap numbers belowight?

But for the agents I've setsix and I'm thinking and maybeh it to eight. Um I'm trying toere the threshold is and it's notsy threshold to find. Butwhat does that look like in termsto eight?Like what's the or 4What's the difference there?likeike a 20 line 100line function?

it really boils down to thetic complexity which is the numberhways through the function. And uhve got 100% coverage then a crapf six means that there are sixways through the through thetion. They're all covered withSo that's really the goal ofright?

Get it all covered withand then limit the cyclomaticity. Um, and you know, I've had aof debates with the agents, andway, you can't trust any debatewith an agent, but I still haveyway. Uh, and they they seem tohat, oh yeah, you know, six isly pretty good. Well, you know, Iyou don't really trust them, butm, but I, you know, I thinke's a threshold difference there.'s another another factor. In myI talk about disciplines. One ofwas was test-driven development.big advocate of test-drivenlopment. But that's a humanipline that's done because humansed a certain way. I cannot andt enforce that on the agents. Ihink it makes any sense to makewrite a single line of a testn write a single line of thetion code and then the next linetest. I don't think that makesse. For a human, it does. Atr me. I mean there's a a hugefor my work but for the agents Iink so. So I allow the agents toe more like John Asterhow woulds to write a function and thenthe test for that function andrite the next function and writet for that function. I allow themdo thaten I have told them to dot-driven development at highpline. They always fall back onthat. They always end up doingSo I figure that's probably okay.bottom line there is it'sly a mistake to impose a humanine on an agent. It is not aake to impose human valuesagent, but there may beolds that we need to change. Butdisciplines themselves, theors, I don't think it's wise tompose those.s a lovely way of phrasing it. Ilike that. So it's it's at-term memory thing, right?

Becausegreat when you have very lowt-term memory, like humans, right?ave enough short-term memory tothe test and then enough-term memory, just enough to makepass, right?You can go out anda coffee or something.okay, that was great. Thank you.aughter] You're welcome.In thewe've talked a lot about buildinghing, right?Right. [clears throat]building the implementation, right,oing module architecture and thatthing. What do you do before youhings off to your specifier?

Howlanning are you doing before yoully go into this gauntlet loop?like putting the wrong work in alet is super wasteful, right?Howthink about that?

Well, so thetemptationto specify,ow, get the human to specify,fy, specify, specify and then givee agent. This is a very oldation. It was a temptation wet in the 70s. It led us to theall uh process and all of that.d the agile revolution was theto that or the answer back todon't know how how well we'rewith the agile revolution either,was the it was a way to say,a minute. All this heavy upfrontng makes a mess of everything cuzmes out at the end doesn't lookng like the plan and never has."the temptation with agents is tosame thing, right?

Okay, we'reo plan plan. Then we'll give itgent. And I have tried this. In've been in the middle of tryingst this week and it's it's alwayster. It and it's always the samee, right?

The you make all theseand then as the agents areg, you the human realize that theyfollow that plan because yout think of everything and they'rewise as you are. So they'reng halfcocked off on some nonsenseu have to stop, back up, rewritean, and then start them overnd so I've given up on that. I"Okay, wait a minute. Let's tryile approach now." And I don'tthis is going to work out. Itot work out all that well, butt's try the agile approach. Let'sthem do a story or two, ande'll look at the architecture at, and we maybe I'll have toly get involved. and you know sortings out and then a few moreand so on. That might be aapproach. We we may never uhe that manual organizing step atd. Although I'm trying to figureto do it, but I don't know It know if that's possible.k of it like you've got this hugeof labor that needs to happen.In the old days, this wasing the thing, right?

and buildinging would take days, weeks, monthsUm, now that has shrunk, right?planning up front and then theis still the same, right?

We'reted to do these faster iterationas devs, but the stuff that wasy quite hard is still kind of thed takes the same amount of time.ing the thing wrong or sorry,ing the wrong thing is somethingu can still do. And I totallyhat there's like this sort of aolks are doing this kind of plang thing where they're just, youhey take their spec and they theyabout their spec, they run theirthrough seven different agents oring and then they um, you know,t back a better plan that theyo and implement or something. Howthat sound not sound good?

gents love to write plans. Oh myss, they love it. And they willish the plans and the plans willgeous and beautiful and spell outkinds of details. [laughter]And then they fall apart at theend.ah, I I think you can see it inndustry right now. There's thisement towards spectriven development.y my uh impression there is thatprobably not going to work. Myriments did not work particularlym, and I'm thinking now maybe weonce again look at the agiled maybe the idea of do a littlet some feedback, do a little bitget some feedback, reorganize, dotle bit more, feedback, reorganize.o tell this story back when Idoing agile lectures.f it cost you$1a change to a house, includingnitial laying of the foundation,initial roof, everything, everyyou gave to the contractor wouldu a dollar. How would you buildouse?

Would you hire an architecty thousands of dollars to theect to come up with the perfectt they then paid a dollar to thetor so that he could build in oner would you walk up to thentractor and say,t the foundation here. Make itshape." Oh, no. That'srs throat] bad. Okay, let's changeoundation. Let's do a little Puttchen over here. Put the livinghere. THERE'S $2. OH, HECK NO.change those around. That's let'skids walk through the oh theic pattern is crappy. Move thers [laughter] or whatever. Umusly the latter is probably bettert's what we are looking at rightcosts a dollar. Well maybe two,ive. But the the cost of changeas plummetedose to zero as I think we'reing to get it. and well that'ss a prediction I'll probably losell right the cost of change hasso far down that why would youis upfront planning because that'sexpensiveouldn't you just fiddle fiddlee fiddle until it looks right[laughter]I 100% agree I couldn't agree morehing I the thing I have I thinka massive issue with theecdriven development labeluse what is spectriven development,Like you can have like 10erent interpretations of it andtime you pass information to ant, right?

Is prompt engineeringi development, right?Like it kindou know, you don't you know, youy to your, you know, if in thes you would have like your matehe other side, your colleague, andld say, you just fix that loadingn the in the header or something.at spec driven development?Right?s that a specification that I'veim?

you know and it seems likee I say okay do a little bit ofont alignment first that approachgets called spectriven developmentme I think the difference is arepersisting your specifications rightyou returning to thoseifications so what's your attitudeke do you do you keep like aall of your specs in the repoyou like what's going on theredo not um the the specificationshemeris they go away. Uh theya lot. I fiddleled with them andw that that goes away. There isivalent to source code. You knowns wrote the source code. So thathat was the final specification.that doesn't exist anymore. Therell source code but we humanshe ones writing it. And a lot ofeel that lack. There has to be athing that defines everything upront. Well,in the end, even what the agentsuce was produced by humans.thing that I've be been doingis this. Instead of creating afication that defines what I wantes what I have even, I look atresult and say, well, that isecification. So, I've got a bunchs out there. I've got like theol runs for closure. It runs forruns for Go. I wrote a few ofight?

I had my agents write them.ot the mutation tester. I've gotgent harness. You know, I've gotse things up there. What I tellis don't download those. I wroteme. What you should do is pointagents at them, haves throat] the agents look at them,en build one for you. [laughter]I think that's a far better way offying the essence of something andustomizing it to your to yourarticular need.It's what I always find weird aboutis that if you send themthing, they read it, right?

hter] Which is very different to, right?

Very, you know, you cant a 20% hit rate if you sendne a massive specification and 20%a bit generous. 5% maybe if youou know a spec to an agente probably going to read it rightpposite side of that is the thingshe agents write the humans don'tread.. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. So they'reexpectinghought of it like that. They'reting us to read everything theyand we just don't. God.o one-sided. You know, long term,interested in how humantionships differ or get differentse we're so used to communicatinggents, right?

I dictate to mySo, it's like I'm just sort ofg to a friend or something. I'minterested in sort of how lifees art over time and stuff. Iknow. That's fascinating to me.. And I think I'm going to askbe the final question, and it's aof fairly beefy one.if that's all right, finalish. Um,onna go John Alart againuse John has a great definition forfferent types of programming, right?e got the tactical programming. Aregoing to get it?

ust have to You've mentioned I'veo pull this book down.> Wait.> Uh,s it's here somewhere.ere's mine?

I've got mine., good. Okay. All right.re you go. I've got mine.here it is. Yep.I got it.> Okay.ne. um tactical versus strategicrogramming. Yeah.actical is the sergeant on the, the person kind of fighting thee. The strategic stuff is thel kind of the person directing therse of the war.think we both agree that's a goodng, right, for different types ofamming. And agents are really goodctical, really bad at strategic.. Now, for people who are justout and AI has now eaten all oftical stuff, how do they learn totrategic programming?

Because Ilot of people here, that's kindthey want from you, Bob. Theylease just give me your brain socan inject into it, understandation testing is so good, tell meo explain these modules. Like,what they want, I think. Soyour job now is to give peopleain. How how how did they learnhat stuff?

Okay. So, umis question a lot. I don't havet answers to it because I reallynow. But but here's how I wouldbout this. Here's here's how I dobout this. First of all, the umay a programmer should learner it's in university or somewhereight?

It should be to write code.ould you should be writing coder a year. I don't know how longshould be writing code so thatow what the agents are dealinghe next thing that I think shoulds that when you get hired into any where that company is makingvy use of agents,e young young person just comingt of trainingd be treated like an agent.he the guy who's running the youaybe the lead engineer or whoevery who's got bunch of agentsng and he's being strategic. Heook at you as an agent and hegive you the same kind of taskse agents have and subject you toame kind of deterministic toolse agent have agents have to use.u should spend several months instate being horribly unproductiveing a hell of a lot. And by theyou've gone through that gauntlet,u can be trusted to run an agentyour own.know. It's going to be somethinghat. You cannot lose the codeentirely.ed to tell peoplears ago used to tell people umou've never written assemblyage, you should spend the weekendng assembly language just so thatow what's really going on behindenes because if if all you'res writing Java all day long, youa fantasy world. There is stillyet that you don't understand.a weekend doing assembly languageou will finally understand what'sgoing on. And I I think thatemains truehow during this educational pathway.got to go from the basics binaryhe way through assembly languagesic code like C some higher levelike Python or something and thenth uh agent kind of work andministic tools and finally be ablerategically run an agent undersupervision.Yeah, [snorts]'t know how better to say that.s so hard though, right?

becauses two there's two things going onright?Like there's the agent isof abstraction layer, right, over. And so you got the code andit's interesting you were talkingan abstraction layer like a sortodule viewer, right?

Like I think's super interesting. That's agood way to learn getting thesef abstractions over the code sou dive in you understand it more. But if you have someone who'sike sitting on your books justtactical work, surely as a companyoing to look at that and go, whyhiring this person when we'veou know, we've got Uncle Bob'sof five hardeners and stuff thatit, you know, a fraction of theht?

I'm I I just I I'm so Okay.at like resources or books can oraches or Sorry, there's one moretion here which is [laughter]I'm trying to like work out howe get this information because theback loop on strategic programminglong, right?Or traditionally itvery long. So you you can oftenpeople who just like quit jobssix months or something, theyt never learn strategic programming,?

Because their mistakes are maybenths away, you know, so they justee the their own mistakes. But Iwith agents, you can, right?it's sped up so much, you canlly get more feedback on youres sooner. And I suppose what I'mted in is how did you know thatgents were making mistakes back iner when you were looking at themng this is dog?How did youdentify that?

ly on I was just looking at thed seeing the dog do. That wasn'tmportant part. The important partnext step where I watched them. I could see the agent strugglets] and I recognized the struggleI have been through that struggle.And that's one of the issues isvice would come in and notcognize the struggle.ow do you learn that?How do youYou know, I learned it the hardhool of hard knocks. How do youhat as a young person coming in?you recognize that?

There is aealth ofation about this. Um the the old, the ones that nobody readsthey're old. Uh the old books onopic are terrific, right?

you goorks by Tom DeMarco or or theEd Yordan or you know go goknow um gez I can't think ofnames right now butagmatic programmer you know thematic programmer um the theere's a lote's a lot of these older booksey're very goodt if you if you study them whenyoung you will get may feel forthis higher level strategic play'll have to filter out some ofhaic stuff because a lot of theseere written in the 70s or theright?

But that's when thesessons were learned.I, you know, that's that's wherego initially. I would go tobooks and learn that stuff thatnd then, of course, you're goingto learn it by feeling it.That's why I think they ought toy uh agents for a few months soan learn what that's really like.ome the agent. Have the agente to you. Yeah. You become a subof the agent. I like that.[laughter]y. I do have one more question.suppose a short one. Sure.Um which isunds like then software fundamentalsill matter, right?

> Yeah.nd why is that?do you say to the people whothat they don't matter?>> Why is that?

Umware fundamentals matter for then they have always mattered. Theee who said this. It was umuhI think who said it. I'm I'mto get this wrong, butare is the most complicated thingumans have ever attempted to do.omplicated than you know any otherhat we've tried. Software is thecomplicated thing. And therefore,ndamentals are the are way ofizing that complexity into a forman be conceived not just bybut by our models as well. Sinceodels are modeled after humansfter all.e fundamentals still apply becausethe way we organize complexity toeived or be to be conceived of.re folks right now who think thatundamentals don't matter. They willnd they will learn that the hardand it won't take very long.take longer than I think it'llecause the agents are pretty good.watched them hit the hit the uhI know that wall is there and Iwant to hit that again.s a very interesting interesting setallels that we're in at the. We you had mentioned the theaction layer, right?

And you know're now at a at a level wherebove the compiler. We used to ourabstraction layer used to be theler. Before that it was assemblyge. Before that it was binary. Andup here at this level of theAt every one of those stepsthe abstraction layer. The peopleat the lower step complaint said,his is going to ruin everything.not even going to have jobsre. It's become so easy thatear-olds will be able to write theAnd you know, back then they werel talking about like binary.[laughter]Yes.step it's the same. And and sot this next step and the peoplere are saying, "Oh, it's going toverything." No, it's not. The sameapply. All the same fundamentalsfor all the same reasons. Theou throw away are the ones you'repick up off the floor in a yeart off and remember why you needthem.Thank you so much, Bob. There's aa great quote from I think Platoe says that writing is going topeople stupider. Right?

So peoplehad that same abstraction argumentyou know the Greeks, right?Ridiculous.k everyone uh watching, how manyave we got on this stream?Uhe got 1,500 people watching.ble. Uh I think we can all agreewas a fantastic conversation. Umnk you so much. Um, hold up yourmore time so folks can uh canit. Let's see. [laughter]ode. And I think what is 11:00ow your time?

Back to theathrobe. Uh,ah. Yeah, it is. [laughter]>> Perfect. So, folks, thank you so much.g to end the stream here. Me ande gonna stay on for a
