# There’s A Pattern To Follow： An Interview with Robert ＂Uncle Bob＂ Martin [u85ZrRfZDyE].en-orig（字幕清洗稿，58302 字）

The great thing about agile is that youknow how screwed you are really earlyon. The purpose of agile is to destroyhope.I'm going to kill [music]the world where CTO share the tales inthe comingunfold. How many CTOs WILL SHARE THESTORIES UNTOLD?

>> Welcome [music] everybody to anotherepisode of the how many CTOs does ittake podcast. My name is Brad Heftigaland my trusty co-host is>> Scott. Welcome, Brad. We have a specialguest with us today.>> Yes, we do. Uh would you like tointroduce our guest Scott or kick it?

>> Sure. I'd like to introduce everybody toRobert Barton or Uncle Bob or Bob as helikes to go. Uh many of you may not knowhim, but he's been influential in almostall of your software engineering careerseven without knowing it. and we're feelreally fortunate to have him here todayto talk to him about what he's beendoing lately, what what he's been doing,what he's been doing lately, and andsome other things. So, welcome, Bob.>> Thank you very much. Glad to be here.>> Could you take just a few minutes to forthe 40 people that listen to ourpodcast,>> 60?

It's up to 60, Scott. [laughter]>> And um you know, just tell them yourbackground. You know, you've been doingthis a long time. you've beeninfluential in our industry and noteverybody knows um you know who you areand what your what your role has been.So, we'd love to hear it.>> Uh let's see. I'm 73 years old. Um Iwrote my first line of code when I was12. That would have been in 1964.Um and the the thing I wrote it on I'vegot it over here.>> Oh, this is amazing.>> This is going to be interesting.>> This is great.>> Okay, so here it is. This is a threebit.You see the three bits?

>> I love it.>> Right. They slide back and forth.There's three little flip-flops in here.And you crank it,>> you know, with that little crank. Uh,and if you set it up properly, uh, thiswill count in binary. It will count fromzero up to seven and back to zero again.If you set it up a little differently,it'll count down from seven to zero. Youcan you can have it play the game ofnim. You can have it add two bits andproduce a sum and a carry. Uh there's awhole bunch of things you can do.Essentially, it's a three-bit finitestate machine. But at the age of 12,this thing fascinated me. This was a abirthday present from my mother and Iput it together and I worked through allthe puzzles and I knew what I wanted tobe for the rest of my life.>> Bob, is that the actual original uhdevice that you got at 12 years old?

Yes, this is the original.>> That's fantastic. I love it. I don'thave my I don't have my Vic 20.[laughter]>> Dog gone it. Do you still have>> I have a Commodore 64 over here.>> Nice. Of course you do.>> It's under It's under glass.>> Of course. Of course you do. I love it.>> And uh I don't think I can show it toyou, but there's a Mac 128 over there.And then this thing over here is a PDP8.See the blinking lights?

>> Yeah. Mhm.>> Well, it's it's a it's actually aRaspberry Pi simulating a PDP8.>> Love it.>> Yeah, it's fun. So, I I was I was a aprogrammer from that point on. Got myfirst job out of high school at 16, atemporary job writing a little bit ofassembly language. Uh got another job at18 that was full-time writing moreassembly language for minicomputers cuzthat was the age of the minicompcomputer, right?

and they had maybe 4Kof core or 8K of you know some of themactually had RAM that was the some ofthem were were uh modern enough to nothave core memory. I spent probably 15 20years doing assembly language in variousindustries, telecommunications and anduh you shop floor control, aluminumdiecast shop floor control, all kinds ofstuff, writing code in assembly languagefor many computers that controlleddevices. Did the bit a little bit oflaser trimming uh controlling a lasertrimmer. Eventually got into um C. Thatwas like the early late 70s. Late 70sgot into C. Uh I had I had been of theopinion that compilers were for weenies.Uh real men were wrote assemblylanguage. Damn it.>> Of course.>> Uh [laughter]and and then I got a copy of Kernahanand Richie. And as I read it, I realizedthat was an assembly language. It wasjust a better assembly language. And soI very rapidly transitioned into C. Andthen from there, you know, bit by bitinto C++ and then Java and and so on.Yeah. I've been a programmer for uh over60 years.>> Yeah.>> And and I still write code. Well,actually now I control agents that writecode,>> but I am I still have my hands on thekeyboard still producing software.>> Love it. [laughter]Are you still producing softwarecommercially or professionally like forclients or are you just doing it becauseyou it's fun and you've been doing itsince you were 12?

>> Why would I ever stop?No. No. Yeah. Noone's going to pay me to write codeanymore,>> right?So, so yeah, I just do it for funand for research. Uh, you know, I'mstill writing books and I'm stillwriting articles and I still try to havean impact on on various social networks,mostly X nowadays. Uh, and uh, I try tomake sure that I know what I'm talkingabout by actually doing it. And I mean,what would I do with the rest of my day?I'm going to be writing code. I toldKent back a long time ago, right?

Theywill find me with my nose stuck betweenthe keyboard keys. If there are anykeyboard keys back then, I want to codefor the rest of my life.>> Yeah. [laughter] And I don't want thatto end anytime soon.>> Yeah. I love it. I love it. By the way,I don't want to like get too far aheadof ourselves now, but it is so I it's itresonates with me that you describe yourpassion as coding[laughter]and and now in a world where we havethese AI agents, these LLMs, these tokenprediction prediction machines that aredoing a lot of the coding. Um but but Ibut I consider myself to very much be acoder.>> Even if my my the bulk of my coding is>> orchestrating agents and then keepingthem online, keeping them in line,keeping [laughter]keeping keeping tabs on them and keepingthem u you know making them deliver thequality that I want to deliver as if Iwas the one typing the code.>> Yeah, absolutely. I mean you they're notgoing to take responsibility foranything. you can see your butt on theon the line. So,>> yeah, absolutely.>> You've got to whip them into shape.[laughter]>> Yeah, absolutely.>> Some somewhere between uh 12 years oldand uh today you also uh have written alot of books and you have been part ofthe movement of of the agile agilemovement. Do you would you like to sharemore about like how that came about?

>> Oh my goodness. The the agile movement.Um this began in '95 and it began uh itcame to my knowledge in the designpatterns movement. So a bunch of guysstarted the whole design patternsmovement. Eric Gamma and you know bunchof guys got together and and they wrotethe book and early on I I was one of thepeople reviewing the book. This is backin the days before social networks. So,so they would they would put the um thechapters up on a on an FTP mirror andwe'd download it in postcript and thenwe would print it off on a laser printer[laughter] and then we'd review it andthen we'd email back and forth about it.That's where the uh the name the gang offour came from from that email group.And in that in that um rapid discussionperiod uh a number of thoughts aboutgetting rid of waterfall started rightcan't we do something more lightweightthis whole you know upfront planningthing hasn't been working for us we needa better way to do it and along comesKent Beck who is a a big part of thepatterns community and he says wellthere's this thing I've been doingcalled extreme programming and I gotreally heavy into that I said you Kent,that's exactly what my clients need.It's what the it's what the what theindustry needs as a whole. And he and Iand Martin Fowler got together and we weconcocted this this scheme to do umextremeuh extreme programming uh courses. Andthese were these were like 5day courses.They went from 9:00 in the morning till9 at night. We built special tables sothat people could pair program aroundthe tables. we'd have 60 70 peoplecoming in there and we'd this is likethe height of the.com bubble. Soeverybody was doing anything they couldto get hot on extreme programming.>> And in the midst of all that, there'ssome other lightweight processes thatwere beginning to get popular. Scrum wasone of them. There were a few others.And it occurred to Martin Fowler and Ithat we ought to get everybody together.So we we uh we convened this thing atSnowbird. What was this?

February of2001, I think. Um, we sent a whole bunchof emails out. Bunch of peopleresponded, those who could afford it andwanted to join, and we all met atSnowbird, and I stood up and said, "Hey,we need a manifesto." And I sat down,and that was my the end of mycontribution. [laughter]And then everybody else kind ofbrainstormed it out. And and in the end,up pops the agile manifesto on a board,right?

It was written there on a board.Nobody knows quite for sure how it gotthere. nobody remembers properly. Andthen uh one a day later down in thebasement in a different room, we had avote about what to call it. And one guysaid, "Uh, lightweight." That was me. Isaid, "We should call it lightweight."Everybody hated that idea. Another guysaid, "Uh, we should call it adaptive."And everybody hated that idea. And andit was John Kern who said, "Well, themilitary really likes the word agileright now." and the rest of us aregoing, "Oh, that's a terrible word." Butbut we voted on it and Agile won by avote.And then [clears throat] it was WardCunningham who said, you know, I'm goingto take this manifesto. I'm going to putit on my website. I'll get a specialdomain name for it. And and here was thekey in insight, right?

I'm going towrite some code that will allow peopleto sign this. This is 2001. Dynamicwebsites were like brand new. Yeah, theact of of changing a website from auser. That was [laughter]very different. And Ward Cunninghamwrites that and tens of thousands ofpeople sign the dog on thing.>> Who [laughter] knew?

>> That's the story in a nutshell. If youwant the a more complete story, by theway, let me get a book down here. Iwrote the whole story in that book.>> Yeah. The whole history, the wholesorted history of who did what to whowhen. all in here along with you knowwhat this agile stuff really is becauseit's not what everybody thinks it is youknow I wrote that about eight years agothen something seven years ago somethinglike that>> I've got two qu two questions here firstfor the people who are not watchingvideo that book is called clean aileback to basics so everyone knows>> uh I have two questions Bob the first isum you were experimenting withlightweight frameworks other people wereexperimenting with lightweightframeworksWhat was it that was in response tosomething and you were trying to getfrom some some place to some otherplace. What were you reacting to thatwas causing you and others to try betrying to do something different?

>> There were two competing uh ideas in theindustry and one of them was um somekind of lightweight iterative process.Barry Beam had done the spiral modelyears before and everybody looked atthat and went, "Oh, interesting." Butyou've still got to have a big plan upfront and you've still got to lay it allout and still have to do the analysisand then the design and implementationshould be easy if you've done theanalysis and the design. That was a amindset that was so thoroughlyentrenchedthat it took a very long time to shakeout of it. and and sometime in the '9s,we we the the ones who were old at thetime and had gone through that and hadbeen proponents of it uh had to lookback and say, "Yeah, well, that didn'twork all that well." And there's thisother school of thought, which is maybewe should just do it in tiny littleiterations.Maybe we should just work the way thatprogrammers are observed to behave inthe wild. That was a catchphrase that weused to use. Uh, and so, okay, then westarted playing around with that. AndKent Beck was one of the ones reallyearly who did this. And there were anumber of other people. Ken Schweber,Martin Dvau, um, Jeff Sutherland, um,they they all kind of started to playaround with this. Alistister Coburnstarted to play around with it. startedto mention it at the at the patternsconferences and we all kind of went, youknow, there's probably something to thisand that's kind of how it all happened.>> And fundamentally what wasn't workingabout the the previous method was thesoftware wasn't very good or it wasn'tit was expensive to build or>> Oh, it was not fun.>> What wasn't Well, it wasn't fun.[laughter]That's number one. But what wasn'tworking was the idea that you couldanalyze everything up front.>> Yeah.>> And then design everything up front andthen the code would come out just soeasily. And what you discover when youdo that is when you start writing thecode, when the rubber actually hits theroad, it goes in a completely ddifferent direction than anybody hadthought. But you don't now have timebecause you've blown all this time onthe big analysis and the big design. Andyou've also got people looking over yourshoulder saying, you know, you're notfollowing the plan. And the developersare sitting there going, "Yeah, but wecan't.">> Yeah.>> The plan doesn't work. This thing wespent six months on does not work. Andnow we've got two months left and we'rejust going to have to hack like crazy.>> That was the um that was kind of the theuh the normal theme of doing softwarethroughout the 70s and the 80s and intothe 90s.>> Yeah, I remember that. Scott, I you youyou started in that time frame too, butI I definitely remember that in the youknow in my professional career from likemy first you know paid software gig was' 89and by 95 it's like it always were thesebig projects. They were like two yearlong, three year long software releasecycles where you spent the first 6months, first year of that two yearslike specking things and designingthings and then you didn't really startwriting code until halfway through youraotted time budget and yeah like likethe classic example is uh you knowdevelopers like has implemented somecode and and eventually QA is looking atit and it's behaving you know it'sbehaving a certain certain way and it'slike what's the spec say about this?

Andthe developer is like the spec's silenton this. Like the spec completely didn'teven consider this idea, but we realizedit once we had the other pieces togetherlike you know it's like a big jigsawpuzzle and you you got all these holesin it. You're like oh the plan didn'teven account for this whole side of thejigsaw puzzle. Like we had to putsomething there.>> Yeah. So agile comes along and says youknow you can use feedback for this. Youcan have the customer on the team withyou and as you're putting it alltogether, they can say, "No, I don'tlike this. Yes, I do like that." Everyweek, every two weeks and and evolve thesystem in the direction that thecustomer wants to go, which also takesadvantage of the fact that the customerdoesn't really know what they want. So,if you ask a customer for a spec, well,they'll give you one, but it's a lie.It's a complete fabrication because theydon't know what they want really. But ifyou show it to them and they can guideit, then it's a much better approach.Not perfect, but it's a much betterapproach.>> So Brad, you know, I didn't startprofessionally until 95.>> Oh, okay.>> And I have always worked in onlinesystems. So like I'd never worked on ashrink wrap piece of software before.And so even though we were still doingbig waterfally kind of things, there wasjust by the nature of the fact that weweren't having to put it on a disc or aCD or whatever and ship it to peoplemeant we could even before the notion ofagile existed, we could kind of be alittle more agile. If there was aproblem with it, we could go fix it.>> Maybe not as fast as we wanted to. So,I've always So, when when the stuff thatBob and others were working on startedto come along in the early 2000s, it wasvery natural. It was just like, oh, thisis just taking kind of the frictionwe've been feeling in terms of trying tobuild online software and really, Iguess, taking those shackles off, Iguess, is kind of what it felt like.There's an argument to be made that itwas the the beginning of the internetand the web that was really the catalystfor the change from the big heavyupfront plan to an iterative approachbecause everybody wanted to see thatstuff on the screen>> and then everybody would startcommenting about the stuff that was onthe screen>> right and that could have been thecatalyst probably was at the time>> you know I this is a little side questbut so in in 1998 I was part of a teamthat launched this website calleddrugstore.com which>> I remember this I bought>> stock>> I hope it did okay for you I remember wewe spent a long you know a while gettingthis thing built and we launched it andI remember the day we launched it ormaybe the day after we launched itpeople wanted changes to the website andI remember sitting with this guy hisname was Zach Stlo and we didn't haveany method for change we only had amethod for like getting it out thereonce we didn't have any plan for likehow are we gonnamake changes, right?

And you know, we'vefigured out branching and source controland all that stuff, but it was it was Iyour point about how the internetbrought that along resonates with mebecause people saw it and they werelike, "Oh, that's not what we wanted."Okay. So, you said something about yourbook that I want to ask. You said thisis this book says what agile really is,not what happens out there. And so,where do you see the [laughter]the differences?

What'swhat do you see happening out in theworld versus what um the spirit of itis?

Agile got uh completely invaded. Umthe space got invaded by the projectmanagers and the and you could blamethis on Ken Schweber indirectly becausehe's the guy who came up with this ideaof the the certified scrum master.[clears throat]>> Um now little story. Ken came to me oneday and said, "Bob, I'd like to use oneof your classrooms." I was running atraining company at the time. I hadclassrooms. I'd like to use one of yourclassrooms and I'm going to teach thiscourse. I've never taught it before. thecertified scrum master course. And Ilooked at him like crosseyed and said,"Well, okay, go ahead, Ken. You can dothat." And I thought it was a terribleidea. Um, turned out that it was a greatidea cuz tons and tons of people wantedto become certified scrum masters, butnot programmers. It was all the projectmanagers. And the project managersinvaded the space and they completelytook it over. They took over theconferences. They took over themessaging uh and literally pushed theprogrammers out.>> Agile was started by a group ofprogrammers and within about three orfour years the project managers had putthe programmers off into a littlecubicle somewhere and had taken over theentire messaging and it was a disaster.It was it was just awful. In themeantime, you've got all theseconsultants out there who grabbed ontothe word agile or scrum and then they'readding adjectives onto the end of it oronto the beginning of it. So there'sfast agile and there's special agile andthere's stable agile and all thesedifferent consultants are pouring intothe industry trying to differentiatethemselves from each other and you windup with a a absolute chaos which is kindof the way the world went. And I wrotethis bookand and the book is like do you rememberhow this began?

I think you know agilewas a small idea about the small problemof getting a small team to do smallthings. It's not some big idea. Weweren't trying to take over the world.We just wanted to solve this one problemof getting a team of six or seven peopleto actually be able to work welltogether. [laughter]So that's that's what the book is. It'sit just tells the same story I told youbut in a lot more detail and it itoutlines the disciplines and the and theprocedures that we used at the time.>> What something you just said sparked atotally different question on my mindwhich is you talked about how it was asmall idea for small teams doing smallthings. And here's a here's a tensionthat I feel a lot. We're trying to be onthe one hand you have this is called theengineering team roughly speaking butthat includes other people likedesigners and product managers calledthe product development team.>> They're wanting to be iterative andagile.>> Okay.>> And then you have at least in thecontext I've worked which is within acompany the business which wants to havesome hor they want to have a road map.They want to have a horizon of thingsthat are going to happen and they wantto know when they're going to happen.and they want to know and it's likethose two things are at odds with eachother of of saying well let's just startprogramming and see what happens versusthis is what we want to do for the nextyear or two or three.>> Sure.>> How have you what's your thoughts onthat that tension or how to reconcilethose things?

>> Have you ever been in a sales meetingCEO sits there with all the sales guysand what does the CEO ask him?Wow,what's the sales forecast guys?How's itall going to play out?and they all givetheir estimates and then you turn aroundone quarter later and they're allcompletely different. Right?

The job ofmanagers is to manage that uncertaintyand of course they don't want theuncertainty. They'll do anything theycan to avoid the uncertainty but it istheir job to manage the uncertainty.That's why we have managers and the sameis true in software. Right?

So yes, themanagers in software want firm dates andthey want firm specifications. Thatdoesn't mean they can get them.[laughter]And if you if you attempt to give them,you're lying. Our industry has beenpunctuated with that kind of lying fordecades, right?See, some manager comesalong and says, "Okay, when's thatmodule going to be done?

We need it bynext Tuesday." And the developer says,"Okay, I'll get it to you by nextTuesday." Well, they don't. So, that wasa lie, you know. And, you know,sometimes the developers will say,"Look, I can't get it by Tuesday. maybeI could get it by the following Tuesday.And then the manager, well, will you atleast try?Which is a completely invalid question.I mean, what is the guy doing?

He's nottrying. What is he supposed to pull somemagic beans out of his pocket and say,"Okay, I'm going to try now." Um, Imean, it's almost insulting to say,"Will you at least try?" And yet thatthat kind of brow beating and that kindof imposition um has an effect. youknow, developer says, "Okay, I'll try."And the reason the developer says thatis because he wants the manager to goaway, [laughter]right?

He's telling a lie and he wantsthe manager to go away. This is a a bigpart of my message to developers, right?You never say you'll try. You never givea date. You give a range of dates. Youmake sure everybody understands it'salways a always a probable variable,right?

It's always an uncertain thing.And then you put it back on the manager.manager, your job is to manageuncertainty. And I'm giving you theamount of I'm giving you the size ofwhat I don't know, you know. So, itcould could be two weeks, it could be 3weeks, it's going to be somewhere inthere. I used to say, um, Bob, if if adeveloper gives you an estimate and inthat estimate they use the phone to,then they're just making it up. So, theycould say, I'll get it to you tomorrow,tomorrow. I'll get it to you in twodays. I'll get it to you in two weeks.Uh it's all it's all just made up andthe and the and the giveaway is thephone too.>> You asked a very fundamental question,you know, how do you resolve thetension?

The answer is you don't.>> There isn't any way to resolve thetension. That is the tension of business>> and it's it's the tension of every facetof business.>> And and the reality is that waterfalldoesn't solve this either, right?

>> No, we thought it did.>> Yeah. This was the classic this is theclassic problem. And I I I can't countthe number of times that I've I meanless so now, but um you know, you getmaybe a a a non-technical executive whosays, "I don't understand why theengineers can't give a better estimate,right?Why are we doing this?Why are wedoing this like uh two week sprints andwe we'll see what we get at the end ofthe two week sprints?

" And I think thatthat's the challenge that the reality isthat these other heavyweight techniquesthat that um claim to provide certaintyactually did not work. Like the thetrack record that those didn't alsoprovide certainty, right?

>> No, no. It's just that they delayed theknowledge of uncertainty until it wasway too late.>> And which is even worse. Which is even>> Even worse. The great thing about agileis that you know how screwed you arereally early on.>> [laughter]>> The purpose of agile destroy hope.>> I got to write that. I mean the quote.So the purpose of agile is to destroyhope. I have to write that down[laughter]>> as early as possible.>> Okay. So Bob, I'm going to I'm going todo a hard tack here. We've been talkingabout agile. Um and I'll do I'll I'llencant I'll encant the AI. Well, I'llthrow this out. One of the movementsthat I see going on in I feel like thereis a classic battle of uh waterfallversus agile actually happening in theway that people are thinking about AI.>> Yes, it is.>> Right. And um for example uh um you knowthere's a part there's a group there's agroup of belligerents that are veryadamant that we need very very highquality specifications upfront and theyhave built tooling like spec spec kitand spec driven development and thingslike that uh before they hand it to theagents. And then there's another groupthat I think are I'll call them a littlebit more like the agile belligerent, butbut maybe we'll just call them like uhvibe coders where they're they'reliterally just>> just hitting the slot machine arm andjust getting something random, seeing ifthey like it, and then pulling it again.>> And that's a pretty wide spectrum.What's what say you, Uncle Bob?

Wherewhere on this spectrum is theregoodness?And where on this spectrum isthere is there pain and chaos?uh justwaiting to bite us.>> So the uh the the lesson of agile stillapplies, right?

We the customer doesn'tknow what they want. We don't reallyknow how to give them what they want.We're going to have to move in littlesteps and validate at the end of eachstep and be able to course correct allthe time. So that still applies whichflies in the face of the big upfrontplan. So yes, you're right. There is abunch of people out there saying theonly way to deal with agents is to givethem a great big spec upfront. Well,that doesn't work, right?

For thereasons that we just talked about. Onthe other hand, the vibe coding ideadoesn't work either. You cannot just sitand type at a at a uh an AI and said,"Now do this, now do that. Oh, this iscool. Now do this." Because the AI willbuild um code upon code upon code uponcode until it all collapses on itself.And this is a problem we identified veryearly on in agile, right?Agile hadthree layers to it, right?

There was thethe out outlookingdisciplines the the disciplines thatlooked out from the developers to thebusiness and that was things likeestimating and planning and andcontinuous integration and so on. Andthen there were the inner disciplines.These were the engineering disciplinestest-driven development, pairprogramming, simple design. They wereextremely detailed and they altered theway a developer worked on aminute-by-minute basis. Right?

It was acompletely different way to work. Andthat's what we're missing in the in theAI space. It seems to me those innerdisciplines. And that's where my focushas been the whole time. How do we getthese agents to be flexible enough towork in an agile way so that you cancourse correct quickly, but alsodisciplined enough so that they're notpiling slop upon slop upon slop andbuilding a tower to heaven that's goingto collapse on itself. And so a lot ofthe work I've been doing is along thoselines, trying to come up with a a set ofdisciplines that the AIs themselves canfollow, not because of rules, butbecause of tools, tools that they mustexecute. And and those tools tell themyes or no. And then the AIS have got tospin on those. They've got to okay, I'vegot to get to yes somehow. And the yesis usually something like um I want my Iwant my methods to be small. I want my Iwant the there to be very littleduplication. I want my modules to beunder a certain size. I want thedependencies between modules to run in acertain direction. All of the rules ofarchitecture, all of the rules of cleancode and good and good design, you cancapture as a set of tools that the thatthe AIS will spin on. And when they'redone spinning, you will have areasonable approximation of good code.>> I mean, those those are those are allthe same rules that you would apply tothe human developers.>> Of course. Of course. Except you can'tyou can tell a human developer, youknow, keep your method small. If youtell an AI that they'll do that for thefirst 10 minutes and then they'llforget. They just they cannot remember,you know, the context window gets toobig and and it gets lost in the middle.And and the the thing about AI agents isthat they get super myopic, right?

Theyfocus and they're really good atfocusing. But as they're focusing, everyother rule you ever told them just goesaway,>> right?

[laughter]>> They if you let them, they will changetests that used to work just so thatthey can make the next thing work. Youknow, they will they will break featuresin order to make new features work. Theywill do every horrible thing that can bedone to code in pursuit of the currentmyopic goal. And you've got to get themin the way of that and stop them fromdoing it.>> Yeah.>> How do you do that?Is that other agentsgetting in their way and looking attheir work and giving them feedback?

IsOkay.>> No tools, deterministic tools,>> programs that they can run that measurethings.>> How much duplication is in this module?

Right. Get a module in there. Now, juststart looking at the lines of code. Andyou can do that with a program. It's areal simple program. Just look at lookat find duplication. Eliminate theduplication. the the agent is very goodat eliminating duplication. They're notgood at finding it.>> So for instance, you would ask an agentto write some code and you would alsosay when you're done writing this code,run these tools against what you wroteand ensure that it's essentially like aform of tests.>> Yes. Yes. It's one of the tests.>> Yeah.>> And and a lot and these deterministictools often are able to work essentiallythrough static analysis of the code. And>> yes,>> therefore we know it's deterministic. Weknow that it will produce the sameresults every time it looks at the samesection of code.>> It's not it's not a it's not a tokenguessing approach, right, which the LLMsare, the transformers are. Uh it'sdeterministic.>> Yeah, it's not it's not stochastic.There's no probabilities involved,right?

The tools are programs and I havethe agents make the programs for me. So,one one of the metrics I really like iscalled crap, and it was invented um in2007, and there was a tool at the timecalled crap for J and for the Javaenvironment. And what it does is itmeasures cyclatic complexity, which isthe number of pathways through afunction, and it combines that with thetest coverage. So it measures the testcoverage of a function and it measuresthe cyclatic complexity of the functionand then it it uh combines those twointo a raw number and the number workslike this. If you have 100% testcoverage then your score is just thecyclatic complexity. If you don't havetest coverage, the score justskyrockets, right?

And I I tell my um sounder the theory that a reallycomplicated function that's not testedis really really crappy,>> right?>> So um I have my agents bring that downto six. No function can be above six.>> And they're [clears throat] happy towrite twelves and 20s and 84s, but thenyou run this tool and they're going, "Ohmy god, I got to get this I got to getthis down to six." And how do they doit?

Well, they've got to cover it. So,they've got to write unit tests and thenand they're writing unit tests and theycan bring it down a little bit, but it'sstill too big. Then they have to takethe functions apart into a bunch oflittleer functions. And and this is allexactly what you want them to do.>> And this is what you'd want a humandeveloper to do as well.>> Yes, you would. But a human developerwould do it um more naturally, not underthe whip of a tool. The AIs need thewhip.>> Yeah. you you kicked a hornet's nest onthe internet recently, Bob, when youwere quoted as saying, or at least theway it's been uh uh repeated is, I don'tread the code anymore,>> right?

>> So,>> that's true.>> Yeah. So, first of all, what I'm curiousto to hear from you, why do you thinkthat caused such a kurfuffle?Why whydid that blow up the internet?Well,there's a bunch of reasons. Number oneis if anybody's used an agent before andthey look at the or or just told chatbtto write code for them and then theylook at the code and they're they'rehorror struck, right?

Because a lot oftimes the code comes out really bad.So, um if if that's what they'rethinking, if they're if they're thinkingI'm just telling the agents to writecode and I'm taking whatever the agentsgive me, well, yeah, they should behorrified. They should be horrified bythat. Um then there's there's anotherfaction and that faction is people whosay um my identity is writing code andyou're telling me that that doesn'tmatter anymore now. That's not what I'mtelling them. But that's how they inferit.>> Yeah.>> And so they they have there's thisidentity crisis and so they reject theidea. No, no, we still have to look atthe code. We still have to we are theowners of the code.Um, and I I reject that. I think, look,these toolsare so good, they're so productive,there's got to be a way to takeadvantage of that productivity. And theworst thing you could do would be toinsert a human into the syntax loopbecause that's the thing we're bad at.We're bad at syntax, right?

They'rereally good at syntax. So let's get theagents to deal with the syntax problemand then we the programmers can take onestep back maybe a half a step not muchbut we don't have to look at the code wecan look at the the the output of thetools we can look at the behavior of thesystem we could look at the number oftests we can look at the coveragenumbers we can also do very interestingthings agents are very good atintrospection you ask them questionsabout the structure of the code and youcan ask them leading questions and andthey can find nuance. It's really coolto do this. And every once in a while,you have to kind of sit back and go,"Holy these things are reallygood."Once you get them to focus, they'll tellyou what's wrong with the code they justwrote. They will not apply that on theirown, but they will tell you, "Oh, yeah,these modules are too big." And then Ithen you can direct them and you cansay, "Okay, you should split theseapart. I don't want the unit tests to beintimately connected to the code. I wantan API in between them. Oh yeah, goodidea. I'll put an API in there. I don'twant the IO being called from the webpage. Oh yeah, I can put up, you know,all of those things that you and I wouldlook at code and go, what the hell didthe guy do that for?

" you can stillinfer thatand then direct the agents to do theright thing. So, I like to pull backfrom the code a half a step. I don'twant to look at the code. I don't wantto look at the syntax because that'llslow everything down, but I can stilltell, you know, my Spidey sense works. Ican still tell what's going on in thereand then I can direct the agents to dothe right things.>> Yeah.>> And that so far, I mean, that has workedreally well for me. So you saidsomething earlier uh that sometime insay the well it's earlier in your careerI think maybe the late 70s you swi youswitched from writing assembly towriting C.>> Yes.>> And one of the comments I've made sortof offhand to people in my world who whoare uncomfortable with not looking atthe code. I said well you don't look atthe assemblyright you you write code and don't lookat the assembly. And I'm wondering andand their response has been well thedifference between the code and theassembly is it's deterministic rightthere's it's but okay well this this iswhat I wanted to explain. I'm wonder I'mwondering if you've had this experiencealready that a lot of people are goingthrough when you made the transitionfrom writing assembly to writing C thatthat others could learn from.>> Oh sure I mean going from assembly to C.Um, you know, I wrote assembly for like15 years.>> So, I [clears throat] knew assemblylanguage and I knew the machine and Iknew the every bit in the machine. Iknew how it worked and how all the flagschanged and I knew the whole thing.>> And then going to see, you have to givethat up. This intimate knowledge of themachine, you have to give up. You haveto back away one little step and treatthe um treat the language as if it'stalking to some abstract machine thatyou sort of know how it works enough sothat you can get the program to do whatyou want. But you've lost the intimateknowledge of the fact that there's thisbit over there called the link thatcaptures the overflow of the accumulatorwhen you add too much stuff to it. allthese funny little flags and addresssegments and all that stuff goes away.And so the uh the the step up just tosee is an abstraction. And then youthink, well, okay, but but it'sdeterministic. The compiler willgenerate deterministic code. Will itreally?

I mean, if it's deterministic,then the code it generated should be thesame between different versions of thecompiler. But that's not true. and itshould be the same if you run thecompiler on a different operatingsystem. But that's not true.>> Yeah. Yeah.>> And and how many times have you seen abug where a compiler bug or a compilerquirk where the exact same section of Ccode in a different place in the programproduces completely different machinecode>> and doesn't workght. Or has Exactly.>> Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Sure. Thathappens. It's rare nowadays. it was muchmore much more prevalent in the 70s,right?

So I I I actually in the veryearly days of my C career uh I wouldlook at the assembly language that itproduced and I was so horrified by itthat I wrote programs that would correctthe assembly language that was comingout of the compiler. Right?

This this[clears throat] this is the point that Ithink the people that are sort of likesaying like I can't trust the AI towrite code. When I look at it, the codeis horrifying. You just said it, Bob.You used to look at the assembly codethat the C the C compiler would generateand you were horrified by it because youwould have written the assembly codedifferently.>> So I wrote a tool. I wrote adeterministic tool that would correctthat problem. Just what I'm doing now.>> Yeah.>> History repeats itself.>> This attitude is extremely old. Whenwhen Grace Hopper, this is like 1952,Grace Hopper decides that writing inbinary is a really bad idea. Uh, andwouldn't it be nice if we could have aslightly more abstract language, whichshe called a compiler?

And she called the idea of a compilerautomatic programming. Right now, thesecompilers were impossibly primitive,more primitive than even an assemblylanguage. It was just one tiny littlestep up above binary. And theprogrammers at the time felt challengedand they rejected the idea. Who's[clears throat] going to do I mean we'rethe ones writing the code and now thatthing's going to write the code. Whatwhat good are we?

[laughter]>> Yeah.>> And that has happened at every stage.That happened during the OO revolution.It happened during the Java revolution.Right. At every stage it happens.There's a a group of people who feelthat they will be disenfranchised. Nowthey won't be but they feel that waybecause this skill that they havedeveloped over a period of months oryears is now looking like it's beingdevalued. It's not but that's how itfeels.>> Yeah. even setting the the emotional andthe identity part of it aside. What youwhat I've learned here today amongstmany things is there's a there's athere's a pattern we can follow whichyou followed when you were moving fromassembly to C and you talked about toolsand deterministic valuation for thisstuff and that's the same pattern we canfollow today as we're abstracting onemore level up right and then another 50years when the world abstracts anotherlevel up it's probably the same patternwe can follow again to make this work>> I had not anticipated this level asrecently is two years ago I was writingarticles saying that we had plateauedthere there were going to be no newlanguages that were meaningful weexplored the language space uh theprocessors weren't getting any fasterthe clock rates had plateaued out um andthat programmers in the future weregoing to be living on this plateau youknow I went up the roller coaster I wentup the exponential curve but theprogrammers from now on are going to beliving on the plateau I can't imaginehow wrong I was I did not anticipatethis this AI thing coming along and Istarted to smell itum about a year ago and even then I wasnot convinced. I thought no this is justyou know this is all this is horrible. II ran a few experiments you know I had Ihad a chat GPT I told Chad GPT to writea C program that would compute the umthe 128th digit of pi and it went out inJava and it went out and it got math.pypi and it it uh turned it into a stringand got the 120. [laughter]Okay,>> you're missing something there, dude.>> That's fantastic.>> But it did exactly what you asked.>> It did exactly what you asked,[laughter] right?

>> Well,>> you probably said, did you did you saycalculate pi or did you say print thedigits of pi out to 100?

>> You know, I don't remember. [laughter]>> Okay. Love it. But but since aboutJanuary and with the advent of theagents and some of the better models,the early Grock model, the early Chad,um the early Claude model, the early uhCodeex model, these things have startedto get pretty impressive. And in thelast couple of months that I mean geeChristmas, the stuff that you can askthem to do, the abstract way that youcan communicate with them and still beprecise enough to to watch them work andcorrect them as they go off off intoNeverland. It's just astounding. It'samazing to me that we've we've gone thisfar and now it looks to me like the thewhole sky is open. Sky's is the limithere. There's there's stuff that we'regoing to be doing in the next 20 yearsthat we can't even think of right now.Say, "Holy cow, we're not at a plateau,man.">> Well, let's ask that question inreverse. When you were writing thearticle about being in the plateau acouple of years ago,>> yeah.>> What were the things that were true atthe edge of the plateau that weren'ttrue in when you started writing C inthe late '7s?

like we might be able tolearn where this AI is going if we sayin 1977 we didn't think X was going tobe true and look what happened and wethought there was a plateau there. Well,actually I don't know if this is rightor not but clearly the online piecessomething we didn't predict but I don'tthink that's actually the right space.It's more like in the in the actualprogramming space I think is where thequestion would be.>> There were lots of hints about theonline space even in the in the 60s.>> IBM was on top of that really early on.They had the 32 3270 screens, the greenscreens. They had already invented anHTML like language. They'd alreadyinvented the distributed processing andthe the browser and server kind ofmodel. All of that had been done, but itwas so vastly expensivethat everybody kind of ignored it exceptfor IBM and the people who could pay,you know, several million dollars for asystem like that. Um but but it but thehints were there and the hints werethere even going from assembly languageto C right it was easy to say you knowit's going to get better than C and andyou know C++ came along just a few yearslater and when C++ came along you knowit was easy to see you know it's goingto get better than C++ don't know howbut it'll probably will and then Javacomes along and people said well that'snot better and there's there's thingsabout it that are better and things thataren't but Okay. And then you know Rubycomes along and closure comes along andPython comes along and you know okayyeah we can see that's kind of a naturalprogression.This is not a natural progression. Therewas no way at least for me there was noway for me to look at the state of theindustry two years ago and predict this.Now I other people were but I I had noclue. No at all. None at all. I in factI used to give lectures at the time andthe lectures were there will never be aself-driving car. I now own a>> Yeah.>> Like okay I was wrong about that one. Icould not foresee this one and it and itjust came down the railroad tracks likea freight train. And boy is it goingfast right now. So it's very exciting.>> Yeah. [laughter]Yeah. And I think that I think that thebreakthrough that that really happenedin the last couple years was just thisthis idea that we we knew thattransformers were really good atessentially generating a string oftokens ba basically predicting tokens.That's like transformers are fantasticat that. And then the only question washow big how big the the essentially thehow big you could how many how many uhparameters you could get into it. Yeah.Right. And so the hyper the whole notionof the hypers scaling of like let's justget these to you know billions andbillions of of tok of of parameters inin the>> in the transformer. That that seems tobe the breakthrough that really all of asudden the scale got to a point wherenow the things that come out of it canbe really quite amazing. You know I wasyesterday just looking at my website andI thought this website's terrible and uhI used to maintain it by hand. It waswritten in closure and I would write theclosure code and okay it would take me aday and I would you know do some stuffand I I um I pointed my agent to it andI said look at the repository of mywebsite and they came back like in fivefive seconds and said okay I understandthat pretty straightforward you knowokay and then I said okay now here overhere are the scripts I use to deploy itand and it looked at that and said okayyeah I get that all right[clears throat]what I want you to do now is um get a aa thumbnail of all the books I've everpublished and put them in a grid on mywebsite. Okay, I'll do that. And justand then it deployed it and it's up onmy screen and all of a sudden I'm inthis mode that I'm I'm very very used tobut not on a website. Not on my website.Uh which is looking at the website. Idon't like thatand it's back and oh, I like that a lotbetter. Okay. Well, okay. Now go out andget every tweet where I used the word uhmorning bathrobe brand. Okay. Put themon a list. It's all up. And this islike, you know, two minutes. Twominutes. And all there's a list on mywebsite of all my bathroom brands.>> Yeah.>> And it searched it searched the the Xplace and found them all. Put link linksup there and it figured out how to dothe deployment and it figured out how tomodify the website. Stuff that it hadnever seen before. I just pointed it atit and the the power of that is just soenormous.Why in the world would anybody want tobog that down by staring at syntax?

>> Well, isn't that I mean to bring thisfull circle, isn't that bringing thepromise of agile development true?Youwere able to say to the agent, do thisthing a few minutes later look at it andsay, hm, it's not exactly how I wantedit. Could you adjust it this way?

>> Absolutely. Right. I I think whathappens to agile is that the you know wehad iterations of two weeks and thensome people said well we do one week. Ithink iterations are one hour now.>> That's literally what you just saidScott like last week. You're like>> well I've been trying through hook andcrook to get uh our product managers anddesigners to actually sit down at thecomputer with the engineerto do the coding meaning the prompting.the prompting. Yeah.>> Just just to do it right there. And whenit when they do it, it works and theylike it a lot. And it it cuts out itcuts out a product manager writing adocument and a designer writing, youknow, well, sometimes the mockup'suseful because you can just feed themockup to the AI, too. But like it justcuts out a lot of these steps where youwhere you um you know loseunderstanding, right?

And you becauseeven if the people are there and theycan just have an extremely high fidelityconversation with each other about whatthey want>> and you know goes back to the pairprogramming stuff. It's like pairprogramming in a different way almost.Um>> and I kind to me I>> I kind of think that's the way it'sgoing to go. Has to go.>> Oh I'm I'm certain it is.>> Yeah. I I uh you know I've told you thisstory before, Scott, but I'll I'll tellit for Bob's benefit. like one of the uhfractional CTO clients that I work with.Um the team is a super high performanceengineering team. They were already youknow before AI came on they were veryyou know high quality engineering. Theyhad all these great quality all theseautomated quality gates you know reallygreat uh layers of CI/CD where theycould you know like obviously developershad their local environments working.They had ephemeral environments thatwould spin up every time a PR was made.You know they had staging. They hadproduction. and they had all thisautomated gates. Um, and then once AIbecame practical, they just like theyjust started accelerating, you know,beyond scope that I could imagine. Youknow, like the the thought experiment Ilike to say to people is imagine youhire a developer on day one of theirjob. They give you a 3,000line pullrequest, right?

And you say, "Oh, I'vegot danger rules that don't let you havemore than a 200 line PR." And I'm like,"Great." So they give you 15 PRs of 200lines, you know, but the reality is youcan easily start you and I challenge theteams to say like what you you can nolonger read that code. You can no youyour old processes aren't going to workfor you. So what processes are you goingto have instead?

And the answer is asyou've been saying, Bob, it's tools.It's like get the tools that basicallyhave the quality gates that areimportant to you that no you you shallnot pass unless this quality gate ismet.>> The agents will build those tools andthey'll build them in an hour.>> Yeah.>> And the thing that's interesting is sothen in one of these teams the the otherthing I see people like panic is oh ifyou've got production software you can'tlet non-developers write code for yourproduction software. [laughter]Well, this team, the CEO, who is been atechnologist, but is not a computerscientist, never classically trained. Infact, he's I I believe he's classicallytrained in music, right?

He's nowwriting code. He's now building featuresthat ship into production just asquickly as the developers because he'sgot all these quality gates that thatforce whatever his agents generate. Itmeets the same quality bar that the thatthe true developers on the team wouldhave also generated. I I'm I'mabsolutely convinced that if you've gotgreat quality gates, and I love theideas that you're bringing up, uh Bob,about the tools like crap and thingslike that, that's that's those are evenbetter layers. Um but if you got thosegreat quality gates, you really cananybody can become acoder, right?

in the in the in theoriginal sense of that uh I have an ideaand I want to see the machine implementit.>> So that's true. There are insights thatonly an experienced developer can havewhen things go start to go squirly.>> Yeah, that's fair.>> Right. So, and so there's nothing wrongwith the the CEO or whoever he is typingprompts and getting features up, but theum the guys who've been around the blocka few times when they're watching theagents, they'll start to smell thingsgoing wrong.>> Yeah.>> And nobody else is going to smell that.And then you have to get in there andkind of say to the agents, okay, youknow, move this over here, move thatover there. Don't do that thing you justdid. Uh and that's fairly importantstill. That may go away as the years goby.>> Yeah,>> the agents may get smart enough. Rightnow, they still do fairly dumb thingsthat could be invisible>> and the tool that the tools don't catch.>> That's fair. I also think, by the way,it it's it's this this pulls on thethread that I I think other people areasking, which is how do we teach how dowe teach the junior engineers?

How do weteach them how to have those that senseof smell, that sense of code smell, badsmells?Um, how do we teach them that?II'm convinced that the answer I give isbuild as much as you can and use theagents to build stuff. That's fine. Butread the code. Don't don't be like UncleBob. Read the code. And when you don'tunderstand why the agent wrote the codethat way, ask the agent why they wrotethe code that way. Right?

Like I and I Itell people like this is how I learnedto program. I I I read the code of otherdevelopers and I asked them to explainit to me and then I wrote code and hadthem critique it and asked them toexplain their critiques to me, you know,and I think you can still do that evenin a world where maybe the actual syntaxto your point, Bob, has been written bythe agent. Be curious about it and andand interrogate it. everything.Interrogate everything. In>> interrogation is a really good approachwith the agents because they're verygood at responding to interrogation. Thethe issue of how do you train new, youknow, people coming into the industry isis an important one and I don't know theanswer to this. One one of the one ofthe ideas I tried to promote a while agowas bring a guy in from schoolum and treat him like an agent.you know, give them tasks. Let them letthem do it. Treat them just like anagent. Run the tools on them, right?

Okay. You've written that code. Allright. Now, I'm going to run these toolson you and and have him play all thedifferent roles that the agents play,right?

So, the there's a coder agent whowrites the code. There's a cleaner agentwho cleans up the code. There's anarchitect agent that restructures thecode. Have him play all those roles overthe course of, I don't know, a fewmonths.And that that might provide the insightsthat are necessary.But I I think it's going to be a reallyinteresting problem, an interestingissue over the next 5 years. How do youbring new people into this industry andand h have them develop the insightsthat are going to be necessary to guidethese agents who will without thoseinsights run rip shot over you. Runrough shot over you. I don't think theindustry is ready to adopt what I'mabout to suggest, but I actually thinkthe right model is more of anapprentichip model. So, recently we justdid some work on our house and thecompany that did the work like there'sthree generations of carpenters thatworked on this. There's there's the guywho taught the second group of guys whoare now teaching the young guys.>> Yep. There was no book that was going toteach the young guys how to do it. Theyjust got experience at doing it withthe, you know, their I guess what's thethe craftsman. I guess that's anapprentice and a craftsman, right?

Kindof supervising and teaching andproviding feedback. And I don't thinklike from a from an industrialperspective, industrial programming likeit's not really prepared to have thathappen. But that's the only way I cansee it working and which is really it'skind of just a flavor of pairprogramming if you think about it. Justpairing working with other people. It'san idea that's been circulated quite abit over the last 20 years. The um thethe master journeyman apprentice model>> um where you bring in apprentices, theydon't know anything. You have ajourneyman who's been there for twoyears, teach the apprentice, and thenthe master supervises the>> the journeyman. It's been around.There's a number of companies that haveadopted that model>> uh in order to train people. And itworks very well, but it's expensive,>> right?

because these guys don't hit theground running. Uh if you're doing aconsulting company for example, youdon't let the apprentices write code forcustomers just, you know, you just don'tthe journeyman can do that and then youthe apprentices are doing internal workand exercises and things. Um but it doesit does it does produce the insightsyou're after. It's just a very expensivemodel. I think you're right in thatthat's that's a viable approach and andit might be the approach we have toadopt.>> Yeah,>> it's going to take some real change ofmindset and change of heart from thebiggest companies in our industry tostart doing it that way.>> This AI stuff ought to be changing anawful lot of minds.>> It's true. It's true.>> Yeah. There you go.>> Well, should we end on that, Brad?

>> Yeah. Let's end>> the quote of the day. This AI stuffought to be changing an awful lot ofminds is a good quote to end on.>> Yeah. Well, thanks a lot for uh takingyour time. Uh my pleasure.>> It was enjoyable conversation and I'llI'll continue to um uh be part of thecrowd that says you're misunderstandingwhat Bob says when he says he's notreading the code anymore. Um and uhyeah, it was a pleasure meeting you.>> Likewise.>> Good to meet you guys, too.>> Awesome. All right. And what do we say,Scott, to all our 60 listeners outthere?

>> Smash that subscribe button, rate andreview, tell all your friends, includingyour mom.>> All right, see you next week, Scott.>> Nice to meet you, Bob.>> Bye-bye.>> This episode of the How Many CTO's DoesIt Take podcast was produced and editedby Saffron Heftal. Our theme song was AIgenerated by Brad. Please follow us onall the social media platforms at howmany CTO's pod. You can find us onYouTube, [music] LinkedIn, Instagram,Facebook, Threads X, Tik Tok, andPatreon, or at our website at how manyCTOSpod.com.And remember to rate, review, andsubscribe on the podcast platform ofyour choice. Thanks for [music]listening.of day.
